Born 1950s, Abramovic first came to public attention when she invited visitors to a gallery in which she appeared naked, stating that the visitors could do anything they wanted to her and she would not resist or retaliate. She provided a number of implements with which to do this including knives and a gun. She narrowly avoided serious injury but her initial premise was correct: like the invisible barrier of etiquette surrounding an art work, there was a barrier of propriety and embarrassment protecting her that was only broached when the beginnings of a mob mentality formed. Abramovic worked together with her partner Ulay until the early 1980s making performance 'sculptures' and endurance works. 'Breathe' involved them in a mouth to mouth embrace for as long as they could breathe using their combined exhaled breath. They braided their hair together and stayed sitting back to back for eight hours. For another work they used a full size bow and arrow and stood facing each other, with Ulay holding the string and Abramovic holding the arrow at the point on the centre of the bow string from which it is released. They maintained this state of equilibrium through tension until the strain of holding on meant they had to stop or let go of the tension in the bow which would have resulted in the release of the arrow which was aimed at Abramovic. In a work called Doorway they stood naked either side of the entrance to the gallery in the doorway facing each other. This meant that those wishing to enter were forced to brush past them and had to choose who to face as they turned sideways to enter. These partner works focused on endurance through concentration and on the tension in partnerships as it is manifested in physical mutual support. They are notable for the degree of politeness and gentleness combined with a power and implicit violence. The artists described them as sculptors. After the relationship with Ulay ended Abramovic continued to make endurance works but while these maintained a formal sculptural quality they acquired a ritual aspect, as in the work in which she sat in a circle of salt surrounded by poisonous snakes and a work made in an amethyst mining town in Brazil for which she made and wore clogs from blocks of amethyst.
