Robert Mapplethorp was a photographer working in New York in the 1980s and early 90s, Mapplethorp became notorious for his photographs of gay men, often naked, sexually unambiguous such as Man in a Polyester Suit which shows an African-american man in the eponymous suit resting his penis on a stool, and another photograph showing a man urinating into another’s mouth, both men dressed in leather. Photographs like these led to him being attacked 
by the Christian right and his exhibitions denounced as pornography. The fact that museums spent public money on exhibiting Mapplethorp's work led to a full scale row in the United States senate and other artists were dragged into
the debate. Senator Jesse Helms led the attack supported
 by The Association for the American Family and religious organisations. The result was a substantial decrease in the amount of support given to artist by the National Endowment for the Arts, the United States government arts subsidy. As well as a questioning of the definition of obscenity laws and a revision of the censorship laws making it easier to close an exhibition or require special conditions to be met. There were many counter claims of discrimination on the grounds of sexuality. Mapplethorp said of his work that he photographed images of love and trust, and that even the most ‘sado masochistic’ of his images represented supreme trust, love and vulnerability on the part of the participants. His defenders claimed that if his images were of heterosexual couples there would have been no such outcry.
The case went to court and a ruling was made that the photographs defined as obscene could only be exhibited in a specially constructed screened off area, with a clear indication to the public of the contents of the these works.
The case increased the public interest in the work and made Mapplethorp eventually one of the best known photographers in the world.
Mapplethorp’s themes were (like many gay artists of the period in which so many were lost to AIDS) love, sex and death. He made many self portraits including the best known in which he wears a leather biker jacket and a leather cap, one as a young man with Patti Smith the singer on a fire escape, right up until his death, including one in which he is visibly frail and  holds a cane topped with a skull and crossbones emblem which owes an allegiance to Warhol's late self portraits. 
Mapplethorp made a series of photographs of flowers which also represent sexuality. He photographed lilies and other exotic flowers in the studio, these were sometimes reminiscent of Georgia O’Keefe paintings usually black and white but some coloured.
Mapplethorp also photographed the body builder Lisa Lyon, whose physique he considered to be perfect and made commissioned portraits, for which he was much sought after by the rich and famous.
Robert Mapplethorp died of AIDS in 1994.
Robert Mapplethorp was a photographer working in New York in the 1980s and early 90s, Mapplethorp became notorious for his photographs of gay men, often naked, sexually unambiguous such as Man in a Polyester Suit which shows an African-american man in the eponymous suit resting his penis on a stool, and another photograph showing a man urinating into another’s mouth, both men dressed in leather. Photographs like these led to him being attacked by the Christian right and his exhibitions denounced as pornography. The fact that museums spent public money on exhibiting Mapplethorp's work led to a full scale row in the United States senate and other artists were dragged into the debate. Senator Jesse Helms led the attack supported by 
The Association for the American Family and other religious organisations. The result was a substantial decrease in the amount of support given to artist by the National Endowment for the Arts, the United States government arts subsidy. As well as a questioning of the definition of obscenity laws and a revision of the censorship laws making it easier to close an exhibition or require special conditions to be met. There were many counter claims of discrimination on the grounds of sexuality. Mapplethorp said of his work that he photographed images of love and trust, and that even the most ‘sado masochistic’ of his images represented supreme trust, love and vulnerability on the part of the participants. His defenders claimed that if his images were of heterosexual couples there would have been no such outcry.
The case went to court and a ruling was made that the photographs defined as obscene could only be exhibited in 
a specially constructed screened off area, with clear indications provdided to the public as to the contents of these works. The case increased the public interest in the work and made Mapplethorp one of the best known photographers in the world.
Mapplethorp’s themes were (like many gay artists of the period in which so many were lost to AIDS) love, sex and death. He made many self portraits including the best known in which he wears a leather biker jacket and a leather cap, one as a young man with Patti Smith the singer on a fire escape, right up until his death, including one in which he is visibly frail and  holds a cane topped with a skull and crossbones emblem which owes an allegiance to Warhol's late self portraits. 
Mapplethorp made a series of photographs of flowers which also deal with sexuality. He photographed lilies and other exotic flowers in the studio, sometimes reminiscent of Georgia O’Keefe paintings usually black and white but some coloured.
Mapplethorp also photographed the body builder Lisa Lyon, whose physique he considered to be perfect and made commissioned portraits, for which he was much sought after by the rich and famous.
Robert Mapplethorp died of AIDS in 1994.

