!!Abstract Expressionism.	

!Abdul'allah, Faisal.
Artist who made an installation that invites the viewer to enter a large box like sturcutrue, those with light coloured eyes are to enter to the left, those with dark eyes to the right. Once segregated by genetic characiteristic, the viewers find themselves in one of two spaces. One is a small room with hglghy polished metallic floor walls and ceiling in a copper coloured metal that functions like a mirror and creates a glowing light. On the floor is an inscribed text that addresses  the viewer personally and asks them to conisider their feelings on arrival in this space. 
The other space the remainder of the larger box like structure and it is pitch black. On entry it can be seen that the small room projects into this space, and is in fact constructed from a material that allows one way vision. From the dark space the viewers in the small space can be seen clearly. However althoght this would seem like a priviledged space due to the materials ig its construction, the people in it seem to be imprisoned, regarded secretely by the watchers in the larger space. 
!Abramovic Marina and Ulay. 
Born 1950s, Abramovic first came to public attention when she invited visitors to a gallery in which she appeared naked, stating that the visitors could do anything they wanted to her and she would not resist or retaliate. She provided a number of implements with which to do this including knives and a gun. She narrowly avoided serious injury but her initial premise was correct: like the invisible barrier of etiquette surrounding an art work, there was a barrier of propriety and embarrassment protecting her that was only broached when the beginnings of a mob mentality formed.
Abramovic worked together with her partner Ulay until the early 1980s making performance 'sculptures' and endurance works. 'Breathe' involved them in a mouth to mouth embrace for as long as they could breathe using their combined exhaled breath. They braided their hair together and stayed sitting back to back for 8 hours. For another work they used a full size bow and arrow and stood facing each other, with Ulay holding the string and Abramovic holding the arrow at the point on the centre of the bow string from which it is released. They maintained this state of equilibrium through tension until the strain of holding on meant they had to either stop or let go of the tension in the bow which would have resulted in the release of the arrow which was aimed at Abramovic. In Doorway they stood naked either side of the entrance to the gallery in the doorway facing each other. This meant that those wishing to enter were forced to brush past them and had to choose who to face as they turned sideways to enter. 
These partner works focused on endurance through concentration and on the tension in partnerships manifested in physical mutual support. They are notable for the degree of politeness and gentleness combined with a power and implicit violence. The artists described them as sculptures.
After the relationship with Ulay ended Abramovic continued to make endurance works but while these maintained a formal sculptural quality they acquired a ritual aspect, as in the work in which she sat in a circle of salt surrounded by poisonous snakes and a work made in an amethyst mining town in Brazil for which she made and wore clogs from blocks of amethyst. Abramovic made a work for a tree sited in a public square in which she placed a number of speakers playing birdsong so that it seemed that the tree was teeming with tiny birds.

!!Art Deco.
!Abts Tomma. 
German painter living in UK born 1970, Abts paints abstract geometric works which rely on a long period of reworking and on very carefully chosen colours. The surface of the works shows reworking and over brushing, evidence of the time taken to make the paintings.
!Acconci Vito.
US artist born 1940s, Acconci made several endurance works in the early 70s, notably Seedbed, for which he constructed a false gallery floor which sloped up form the door to the rear of the space. Acconci was reputedly sealed in the vodi under the floor masturbating. In another work he constructed a shelf high up on the gallery wall in such a way that he could not be seen by those in the gallery from any angle and stayed on the shelf for the hours during which the gallery was open. In these works he made the gallery space and the viewers own feelings about being in that space the subject of the work, by his invisible presence having the maximum possible effect on the viewer. 
A smaller scale work is a video playing on a monitor placed on a furry rug on the floor. On the screen Acconci is seen, lying on his stomach, his face right up against the camera, talking to the viewer and inviting them to lie down on the rug, to join him on the floor.
!Acres Reverend Ethan.
Ordained clergyman from California who also works as an artist, making live works that combine a religious service with performance, usually involving a sermon, and other performers.
!Act Up. 
Group of gay rights activists working in US chiefly NY in the 1980s, consisting of artists and others. Poster campaigns and subverting advertising, us of official statistics to point out discriminatory practise. See guerrilla girls.

!!Fluxus.
!Adams Ansel. 
Born 1880s, died 1970s, American photographer working at the beginning of 20th century, Adams was a pioneer of landscape photography. Chiefly known for his images of American national parks and wildernesses, such as Yosemite and Yellowstone. When he made these Photographs the wildernesses were not well explored and many parts remote and inaccessible, necessitating many days trekking with equipment to get the images he wanted. The photographs capture the enormity and grandiosity of the landscape and came to represent the American wilderness to the rest of the world. Because of their huge scope and precise depth of field they seem to be photographic records of time passing although of course they only record a moment in time.
!Add N to X.
A musician duo one male one female, both born in the 1970s who made video works in the late 1990s early 2000s, for example a continually changing colour grid controlled by the soundtrack which accompanied it. Also Angela Bulloch
!Affrassiabi Shahin.
British artist born 1960. Affrassiabi conceptual installations employ household items and materials to make formal sculptural constructions which reference other art.

!!Arts & Crafts Movement.	
!Agar Eileen.
British artist working in the 50 and 60s, made sculptures and reliefs, both abstract and symbolist, some small objects. Dead.
!Aitchison Craigie.
Scottish painter born 1940s best known in the 1980s for his paintings of his pet Bedlington Terrier. The dogs are painted in profile on large brightly and flatly coloured canvases.
!!Expressionism.

!Aitken Doug. 
American film and installation artist born in 1975. Aitken first worked in commercials and used the experience gained in this field to make a series of multi screen and projected video installations, winning a Golden Lion at the Venice Biennale in 2001. Diamond Sea featured a deserted mining town in Namibia, which is not marked on state maps to ensure that its location remains secret. A sense of the people who worked there is evoked (and their exploitation implicit) and a haunting empty beauty. Aitken works all have soundtracks made by him which form an integral part of the installation , sometimes several films will play at once resulting in a blend of soundtracks. Another work, a film of people attending a travelling cinema in India, was screened in a tented room with sand on the floor. Aitken's works deal with location and presence, with a sense of place being a priority.
!Akkerman, Philippe.
!Albers Josef.
US painter born 1900, died. Albers made geometric abstracts usually based on the square, using dull versions of primary colours. He was interested in the optical effects of colours on each other. Albers was a lifelong teacher of art and was Eva Hesse's professor. He is discussed in Hesse's diary.
!Allen Philip.
British painter born 1970s, Allen's almost abstract paintings of the late 90s and early 2000s are a change from his previous figurative work. The paintings have a roughly painted background and a multicoloured scallop motif on top, referencing landscape and abstract painting. 
British painter born in 1970s moved from figurative paintings to abstraction, making brightly coloured abstract landscapes painted roughly and lumpily, with more neatly painted lines of scallop shapes over the top. He makes reference to the impossibility of painting, a dilemma for many late 20th early 21st century artists.

!!Group of Seven.
!Allington Edward.
Allington is a British sculptor who was part of the group of artists born around 1950 making large scale ambitious work in the 1980s and 90s. his best know work is Horn of Plenty, a cornucopia of found objects. He used the cornucopia extensively as motif, and was one of the artist invited to propose a work for the empty plinth in Trafalgar square in London in 2001
!Almond Darren.
British artist born in 1970s. Almond interested in time. He made a large  clock the type that has 24 hour time display in figures that flip over, to be mounted in a public institution or railway station that displays the time going very fast so that a minute is a second and an hour is reached in a minute. He also made a large aeroplane propeller painted white and mounted horizontally on the floor of a gallery so that its blades nearly touch the walls leaving just enough room for a person to pass. He set up a live video link between a gallery and an empty? prison cell, permitting the viewer a fly on the wall experience of visiting a gallery to visit a prison cell. Almond also made a video titled Ghost Train which is filmed in a ghost train at a fairground somewhere in Austria, in black and white. Filmed from one of the cars, the film is grainy and visually lyrical as the low light conditions of the video alter what the visitor would see. The sound of the train and the sound effects of the ride which are edited with a musical soundtrack when represented somehow demand a different attention from the viewer. Recreated a bus shelter in a town where there was a Nazi concentration camp, the viewer is able to 'wait for a bus' to take them as a tourist to visit the camp, whilst pondering on the wait for transit
what else?
!Althoff Kai.
Born around 1960, bright water colour paintings on paper
!!Baroque	Hudson River School.	
!!Neo-Expressionism.
!Alys Francis.
Born in the 1950s, Brazilian or Mexican artist who made a series of works in the early 90s in which commissioned a sign painter to paint a sign, which he then set up in his studio and asked the painter to paint the scene including the sign. Interested in appropriation and reproduction.

!!Bauhaus	Impressionism.	
!Andre Carl. 
Born 1948, Andre leading artist in a generation of US minimalist sculptors working in the 1970s such as Donald Judd and Robert Morris. He is notorious for his 'pile of bricks' purchased by the Tate gallery in London in 1980, which was derided in the press for being nothing but a pile of ordinary house bricks. This work, an arrangement of house bricks in a plinth two bricks thick was similar to his other works, chiefly floor works consisting of metal tiles arranged in rectangles and lines. It was an important part of the work that the viewer was free to walk on the sculpture. These works are both self effacing in their near invisibility and grandiose in their ambition, Andre said that they represented footprints of much larger structures  and that he wanted to imply monolithic structures through minimal and economic means. A tension between the monolithic and the invisible. 
Andre also made a number of text works, some with 'x's and 'o's in rows, and others a kind of concrete poetry made by fitting words into some kind of geometric system.

!!Ancient & Classical Art.	
!Andrews Michael.
British painter
!Anger Kenneth.
Underground filmmaker born in the 50s whose best known film Scorpio Rising had an influence on a whole generation of artists and filmmakers.
!Antin Eleanor.
American artist born around 1948. In her best known work Carving: a Traditional Sculpture made in 1971 Antin put herself on a strict diet and had a male doctor weigh and measure her every day for a month, on of a number of works in which Antin investigated the effect on women of the ideals forced on them in a patriarchal society. In this work she attempted to literally sculpt her own body, making a comment both on women's control over their own bodies and the centuries of depiction of the nude female body by men, and on women's continuing need to make themselves attractive for men. The performance was documented by one photograph every day which were placed together in a grid and framed, and by a video. During the 1980s Antin began to make more theatrical performances, using cut out puppets. She also developed an alter ego, Eleanora Antinova a trans gender Russian ballet dancer who wore a tutu and a long beard.

!!Bloomsbury Group.	
!Antoni Janine.
American artist born in the late 1970s who made a series of performance works and installations. Chocolate Gnaw and Lard Gnaw involved the artist chewing as much chocolate as she could from a one metre cube and melting the resulting chocolate to make chocolates. The lard chewed from a similar sized block she made into lipsticks. The residual blocks are displayed as part of the work. She also cast busts of herself from the chewings. 
The chocolate and lipstick products were displayed in luxurious packaging in a mirrored and gilt edged display case such as might be seen in a department store, making a connection between the basic act of chewing and eating, female relationships to food and body image (fat and chocolate) and cosmetics and the role of packaging in the stimulation of desire. In 'Harmony Hair Colour' she used her long dark hair as a brush to make paintings with hair dye on large pieces of paper on the floor, making a reference to Yves Klein's blue paintings made using women's bodies as brushes. 'Sleep' was an installation in which Antoni slept at night, wired up to a machine which recorded her R E M patterns. She transferred the resulting line on the graph drawn by the machine onto a continuous sheet of paper onto a specially constructed wooden loom in the same room and wove on it a white fabric with the sleep patterns as a blue line. The resulting fabric length was a long as the sleep graph whose length was defined by the number of days Antoni slept in the gallery. As soon as she hade enough, Antoni made the fabric into a nightgown in which she then slept, sleeping clothed in her sleep as it were.
!Appel Karel.
Dutch abstract painter working in the 1940s and 50s, Appel formed the CoBRA group of painters in Amsterdam. Bright colours, semi abstract impasto paintings with smiling toothy faces. Died.

!!Fauvism Op-Art.
!Applebroog Ida.
American artist born in 1930s, Applebroog's paintings and free standing paintings are concerned with memory, childhood and narrative. She often uses the device of the predella form, coupled with the film negative, in an allusion to the votive object and the memory preserving photograph. The narrative of her work is often about childhood and hints at abuse, and it is very much the work of someone who is a mother. The paintings are often constructed from several canvases butted together. Freestanding works are propped on the floor upright or placed horizontally. Applebroog made a film with her daughter, film maker and artist Beth B, which is a loose narrative of unhappy childhood with a dreamlike quality.
!Aramesh Reza.
British artist born 1960s works in mixed media, made painting of the branches of trees, and installations with furniture and real stuffed animals.
!Arnold Liz.
British artist born 1963 died 2002 painted women and anthropomorphised cats, very often with flowers, inhabiting story book universes, painted in strong colours with lots of black in a neat way. Arnolds creatures inhabit the real world in an unreal way and often seem to have very serious but mysterious business to undertake. They are fashionably dressed and wear jewellery and have long eyelashes, sometimes there is a kind of science fiction atmosphere.
!Arp Hans.
Dutch artist worked in mixed media and painting made a lot of wall hung reliefs and construction, using primary colours and white, and simple shapes, usually curved. Died.
!Art and Language.
British artist duo born around 1950 known for their dry conceptualism dealing with art and text as a subject. A number of paintings with text added.
!Artschwager Richard.
American artist born in 1940s who made sculptures of furniture in the late 70s and early 1980s, at the same time as Ettore Sottsass's Memphis group was making furniture from laminate in Milan. A table represented by a box covered in printed laminate legs, and a pink tablecloth he rendered a useful object into an unusable sculpture constructed from banal materials used for cheap furniture and never for sculpture. Artschwarger also made a series of Chippendale chairs from laminate, their form flattened out and clad in unlikely patterns and designs. He was interested in these works in making unlikely combinations of generic form with generic material, forms from classical era or from antiquity with modern materials, in doing this he was following the ideas of the architects Alice etc who wrote a book about the architecture of Las Vegas. The strip

!!Bloomsbury Group.	
!Atget Eugene.
US photographer of the early 20th century born in 1870s died 1950s
!Atkinson Conrad.
!Attila.
Russian artist born in 1960s figurative, one of the few Russian artists to be commercially successful in the west during the 1990s.

!!Bloomsbury Group.	
!Audeoud Fabienne.
French artist born around 1968, Audeoud's work comes from her interest in classical music specifically opera. Video works show Audeoude as a diva singing to the point of collapse, and as a fading diva on a self destructive binge in her bedroom. There is a spare and often painful quality to these works which are superficially abject and comical which make them serious in their effect on the viewer. A project to unlearn the piano took many months, in which she set herself the task of unlearning everything she knew about playing the piano, this like many of her works was done daily, all day, in a gallery. A performative and endurance aspect to all work. Filmed a brass band rehearsing, they are static but their discordance is at odds with their calm appearance. Other performances. Manifestos. She also made several collaborative painting exhibitions with former Bank artist John Russell. These were room sized canvasses painted quickly and fairly badly, figurative, vaguely narrative with text added.
!Ayres Gillian.
British artist who made abstract paintings throughout the 60s to the 90s. Her work is brightly coloured, abstract impasto.

!B Beth.
US artist film maker daughter of Ida Applebroog born in 1960s.

!!Situationism.
!Baader, Johannes.
German artist involved in dada and cabaret Voltaire from the fringes, Baader also carried out a number of extreme public performances, often involving mass leafleting and physical risk to himselg
!Bacon Francis.
Very influential British painter born in 1920s Bacons paintings are conceptual but theatrical figurative works with abstract qualities. They are nearly always portraits, in which the figure is distorted, often to grotesque effect, perhaps looking if they have been melted or brushed away, often the figure appears to be in discomfort. The figures are rendered with rough brushstrokes, and are placed on a contrasting flat colour background, often within a delineated 'three dimensional space'. Bacon made many self portraits, one of his best known works is the diptych Three screaming Popes 1960? Three large canvases each with a portrait of a pope in a cope and mitre, within a kind of abstract geometric frame structure, on dark orange and red grounds. The faces of the popes are blurred and distorted. Also painted a dog which is either curled up or chasing its tail, as with Bacons other work, there is an impression of movement as if a photograph has been taken on a long exposure and the sitter has moved, leaving a trail of the movement on the image.
Bacon was almost as well know for his lifestyle as for his work. A heavy drinking habitué off bars in Soho in London he live a solitary and obsessive working life, rarely spending a day without painting. His studio was famously untidy and dirty. Bacon died in the 1990s.
!Baechler Donald.

!!Medieval & Gothic Art	.
!Bag Alex.
Us artist who worked in video in the 1990s. Made a video about being an art student.
!Baker Bobby.
British performance artist born 1950 who came to prominence in the 1980s with her food performances. Baker returned to art in her late 40s after raising a family and trained as painter, but began to make performance art when she found that a painters life was not compatible with bringing up a family and that painting and its history did not offer her what she needed to make work about what interested her, namely the creativity inherent in domestic and family life. Baker sought a way to represent this creativity, which is routinely unacknowledged and deeply unfashionable as a subject for artists. In her first performance, 'Drawing on a Mothers Experience' she made a 'painting' by telling the story of the night one of her children was born through the food that was consumed by her before and during her labour, producing this food and using it to make a painting on a bed sheet and black treacle, steak used to 'print', milk, jam. 
The resulting work bore obvious and intentional comparison to an abstract expressionist work specifically Pollock, she then obliterated it by sieving icing sugar over it and rolled herself up in the sheet. All conducted with much humour and joking and audience interaction. Baker making a point about traditionally male 'work' of painting by making a painting which far from being a commodity is merely the residue of a creative act, ready to be washed and dried. An Edible Family in a Mobile Home - baker constructed a family from cake and icing and placed them in a caravan. A performance in her own home, the audience invited into her kitchen to watch her discuss menial domestic tasks and what she enjoys about them, for example the freshness of washing cabbage leaves, the fun of icing (she poses on a revolving cake stand). After each action she pins a symbolic item onto her white coat so that she is a living relic of her day at home. Apparently casual yet very choreographed. Also a performance in which she gets into a bath of chocolate custard. Baker drawing on the work of 1970s feminist artists who made the domestic their subject to point up the inequality of domestic work and its consequent effect on themselves as artists. However in her re-appropriation of this work focussing on food, eating and the artists body, she added humour making it substantially different.
!Baldessari John.
Dead?

!!Medieval & Gothic Art.
!Balkenol, Stefan.
German artist who carves large, often over 3 metres high, figures from whole tree trunks. The figures are carved roughly and all the chisel marks are visible, no attempt beign made to smooth the surface of the wood. the sculptures are painted. Balkenol has made site specific work such as the 6metre high figures he placec on wooden pile in the river Thames in London. His carvings rfefer both to folk art and to historical plychromed sculpture whilst the figures are clearly of their time.
!Ball Hugo.
Dada artist and prominent member of Cabaret Voltaire. Ball instigated many of the collaborative performances and wrote many of the poems and scripts for them. He performed regularly.
!Balla Giacomo.
Italian artist born 1870s died 1960s member of the group of futurist artists centring around Boccioni and Marinetti in Italy in the 1920s and 30s. Balla chiefly a painter pursuing with obsession the ultimate means of depicting speed. A portrait of a dachshund walking with spoke like lines emanating from each of its legs particularly memorable.  
!Balthus.
Painting around the turn of and early 2oht century, died 1980s, Balthus was interested in the domestic interior and in young women and girls. His paintings have a restrained palette and a dream like quality, a feel of quite afternoon about them. The features of his female sitters are flattened and idealised. Balthus continued to paint until he was a very old man. 

!!Medieval & Gothic Art.	
!Bank.
British collaborative artists John Russell, Millie Thompson and Simon Bedwell, born in the 1960s, worked as Bank in the 1990s until Russell left in 2001. Thompson and Bedwell continued to work as Bank until 2003. Bank produced a large body of painting, sculpture, printed matter and texts as well as curating several seminal group exhibitions. They directed their attentions at the art world making ironic and satirical work underpinned by a detailed knowledge of and love for art history, a sense of humour and a disrespect for the establishment. In fact this last could be seen as Bank's trademark. 
Bank painting spanned a range of styles from highly realistic still life featuring the detritus of their studio painted in old master style, 'bad' figurative painting, 'serious' abstraction
still lives, self portraits. They explored the world of painting as iconoclasts. Most exhibitions accompanied by a printed text a polemic on the state of art, of the world and of artists. Irreverent and downright rude, those (especially their targets) who failed to get the joke found nothing in Banks work for them.
Bank Newspaper was self published for 10 years, featuring news about the art world, drawings and photographs on a tabloid model. Slanderous, even libellous, the paper had several favourite targets and no one was safe from their cruel wit.
In 2000 Bank published their on going fax back series as a book. For several years they had been returning press releases to the gallery that sent them, edited, corrected and with suggestions. These served to highlight the pomposity, inaccuracy, bad grammar and inflated claims made about artist by their dealers to hilarious effect. 
Curated exhibitions the first of which was in a bank giving the group their name were mostly held in Bank's studio in London's East End. Other shows were titled galleries poo poo, cocaine orgasm featured a life size self portrait sculpture of the group members on crucifixes?? Also skip By who? Lolly Batty, etc They showed a group of old master still lives in Cork Street and a group of abstract paintings featuring poured paint and some screen prints with text. In 2003 Thompson and Bedwell posed semi-naked for a series of photos dressed as classical figures from paintings but using their untidy studio as a background and anything to hand as costumes and props. 
!Banner Fiona.
Banner is a British Artist born in 1965 who uses text as her material, first coming to prominence with a work called ' the Hun t for Red October' in which she wrote out the entire synopsis of the film of that name by watching it, and then typeset this and printed it on paper in landscape format on a large scale. The net effect was of a text that could be seen to represent the entire film but was not really possible to read due to the line length, once the reader got to the end of a line it would be necessary to walk back along the work  to find the beginning of the next. This produced a tendency to read vertically, skipping form line to line, thus the viewer produced their own reading of the text which gave the impression of the film. 
Banner followed this with several similar film synopses works, culminating in The Nam, a huge paperback book which contains her synopsis of the film Apocalypse Now. She also made an audio work of her reading this synopsis, which is produced in a flat vocal style rendering it difficult to  listen to, but its strength lies in the effect t on the listener...etc. Banners work has most usually referenced film, the book and the printed page, but she has also made work about songs and music, including bob Dylan song a large work on canvases. The words of the song are spelt out in large stencil style letters on un primed canvases 3 metres high, then cut out so that the canvas is mostly gone. The song stretches over several canvases.
Latterly Banner has made several sculptural works in which she produces three dimensional versions of punctuations marks in particular fonts. These are carved from polystyrenes and painted or actually cast in bronze. She was a turner prize nominee in 2002 and showed a number of works dealing with pornography, including some in which she removed all the text from a narrative leaving only the punctuation.

!!Medieval & Gothic Art.	
!Bar Amotz Guy.
Israeli born artist born 1970s living and working in London. Bar Amotz's work deals with sound and music. He makes sculptures that often incorporate speakers made from household objects, or especially made fibreglass structures, which have a hard core futuristic look about them. A giant karaoke machine which could be entered by the viewer. An amplifier which is worn as a back pack housed in a rigid fibreglass lacquered shell. Bar Amotz sometimes uses metallic car spray to finish his objects which gives them an ambiguous but functional appearance. In 2003 he made a machine to be worn by a dancer whose movements triggered various sensors, thus the movement created the music.  
!Barker Sally.
British artist born in 1960s who assumed an alter ego Tela, who was a goddess or warrior queen. Barker performed as the goddess sitting on a throne, with acolytes, dressed in a cross between Roman and Viking costume, looking a bit like Boudicca, with gold sprayed greaves, wristbands and a helmet..

!!Medieval & Gothic Art.	
!Barney Matthew.
US artist living and working in New York born in 1960s. A sports enthusiastic, super fit from working out and rock climbing, his prolific work includes video, film, and sculpture. Came to attention at Documenta Kassel in 1993 with a performance Drawing Restraint in which he was tethered to the back wall of a squash court with a rubber bungee and suing his own strength to get himself to the opposite wall, made a drawing on that wall. He also scaled a lift shaft in a multi storey car park naked, using climbing equipment, with a surgical/machine tool implement inserted in his anus. These performances documented on video. 
They are followed by the sculptures made from petroleum jelly. This is known both as a medicinal aid and a lubricant with sexual associations, and barney used it to cast sculptures of pseudo gym equipment, rendered very realistically and shown in refrigerated spaces. Like and perhaps even in a tacit acknowledgement of Joseph Beuys use of lard, Petroleum jelly became a significant element of barneys later work. The sculptures have a strange atmosphere - they seem made to be used, yet unusable, familiar yet mysterious, everyday yet perverse and slightly sinister and to allude to sexual practises.
Barney made a series of feature length films Cremaster I to V. These are shot in 35 mm to commercial cinema standards, but made by a tiny crew with the exception of the final film on a shoestring budget. The series explores the world of Barney symbolism, perversion, fetishistic, oneric, surreal. Started by making 2, then 1, 4, 5 and ends with 3. The films conceived as a whole and made in the order the artist wanted to over a period of 10 years. 
Cremaster 2 is set on an ]American football pitch. There is a long sequence of synchronised marching shot from above on a crane and from pitch level., featuring women dressed as glamorous grown up cheerleaders moving in tightly choreographed formation. They begin at the edges of the pitch and gradually from the shape of ? one of the Cremaster logos. Jewelled harp?
Cremaster 1 is filmed on a frozen lake on which a kind of snow fort has been constructed
4 is filmed on the Isle of Man and take the Manx symbol the three legs of man and the annual TT motorbike race as its main subject. Barneys character is a kind of fawn with red furry legs and pointed ears, as well as a kind of goblin and a peasant girl and her parents. There are other exotic creatures and all have strange mutant genitalia, introducing a consistent theme throughout Barney's work. Much is filmed on giants causeway, and there are shaking giants footsteps. Barney says the film is based on a Celtic myth of a pebble being thrown into the sea and becoming an island and something to do with the giant of the causeway. 
5 set in the Guggenheim museum in new York and in the interior of an airship with stewardesses in very chic uniforms seated round a table with a large display of grapes. One of the stewardesses is under the table on a small plinths curled round the tables pedestal holding on precariously while trying and succeeding in making a hole in the table cloth above using hairpins and then gradually pulling grapes through. The grapes are red and white. She eats the grapes. This is intercut with animated film of grapes in lines forming various symbols. In the Guggenheim Barney, dressed as a Scottish piper in full ceremonial dress slowly ascends the outside walls of the huge spiral stairway using climbing ropes and shackles. On each level different people and groups are encountered, for example a long line of can dancing women who place one extended leg on the edge of the balcony for barney to crawl under, an extremely beautiful woman, and a small child.
Segment in empty warehouse with Norman mailer and lots of water and Ursula Andress in black jewelled outfit. 
V is shot in the G??baths in Budapest, and features an opera singer. It is acknowledged be the least successful of the 5 and is the most ordinary in a sense. Barney wanted to make a film about singing. Features Ursula Andress
3 the most recently made is shot entirely on a set and features the Chrysler building in New York. The film opens with a long sequenced involving a hermaphrohditic almost dead person recently disinterred from a living grave being deposited in a black sedan in the centre of a hexagonal room which also contains a crow. The arena is eventually recognised as an empty floor high up in the Chrysler building, and the corpse to be Gary Gilmore. As we imagine the crow to be pecking out the eyes of whoever it is in the car, 5 large apparently driverless cars emerge from the corners of the space and begin a kind o f ballet, repeatedly hitting and gradually crushing the black sedan until it is no more. Bar staffed by a stereotypical Irish comedic barman who in pouring Guinness becomes overwhelmed by foam. The main character (barney) is a construction worker on the building involved in steel erecting of the top structure.
He is a young handsome Irish character who has some mysterious secrets, revealed when he visits 2 'doctors' in a room in the building who reveals under his tattered clothes which appear to be Masonic - a leather apron with Masonic items in the pocket his mutant genitalia. He excretes a petroleum jelly 'turd' which immediately mutates. This is a scene of intense peculiarity.
As the top of the building is constructed the man is involved in a kind of wedding at the pinnacle, under a floral arch with ribbons which are finally unfurled and thrown over the side of the building to float down until they are caught by the workmen and drawn in throw the windows in a carefully choreographed order to create a spiral of ribbons on the exterior of the skyscraper as if it were a  giant maypole. one the pair who is married has their head crushed by falling steel.
Barney says that this film brings all the others together and is about nationality and origin (he being the grandson of an Irish emigrant labourer who did indeed work on the Chrysler construction crew). The mutant genitalia, gym equipment and logos and symbols of all the films relate to the title of the sequence, Cremaster. The Cremaster is a muscle located somewhere between the scrotum and the anus, and it is somehow significant in both sexual performance and procreation, but most people are unaware of it. Barney treats the muscle as if it were one that could be worked, and as a metaphor for his own ideas about creativity and the individual.
!!Medieval & Gothic Art	.
!Bartolini Massimo.
Italian artist born second half of the twentieth century.
!Basquiat John Michel.
Graffiti artist from the Bronx in New York, Basquiat was born in 1973 and died in 1998. He was discovered by a dealer and began to paint on canvas. Fostered by his patron dealer who provided him with studio and materials. Basquiat became hugely successful and his work commanded high prices. Feted by the art world for his work, his looks and his rebelliousness. He used graffiti tags combined with idiosyncratic signs and symbols creating a way of making a painting that successfully combined street and afro Caribbean consciousness with abstraction. The outline of a crown a reference to his own self-determined kingship, was his signature, the skull often appeared. Mostly painted in black and bright colours on white ground, drawing in outline and rarely filling in, sometimes used white on black to give a blackboard effect. The apparent naïve style used to issue a series of commands and demands on the world and his viewers, which are both egotistical and irresistible. Perhaps unable to cope with his success h became addicted to heroin and died of overdose before he was 30. Andy Warhol befriended Basquiat towards the end of his life and they made large collaborative paintings together. Basquiat later mytholgised and feature film of his life made.

!!Medieval & Gothic Art.	
!Batchelor David.
British artist born in 1950s who uses coloured acrylic sheet to make strange utilitarian low trolleys in a multitude of colours which are then arranged to make an installation, or stacked to make a tower of coloured light.
!Batty Lolly.
UK artist born in 1960s made a series of abstract sculptures of three dimensional polyhedrons, carved in polystyrene and painted to a smooth and apparently solid appearance so that they appear to have been carved. A kind of solid waist high diagrammatic snow flake in appearance, very smooth, clean and white.
!Baxter Glen.
British artist born late 1930s, cartoon drawings accompanied by text of events, happenings and people that illustrate a typical Englishness with a self deprecating humour, and a surreal, slapstick narrative. These cartoons were used by advertisers in the 1990s and Baxter's work although anonymous became extremely widely known. 
!Beardsley Aubrey.
Born in 1830s, died around 1900, working in 1860s in London and paris, Beardsley's finely executed an intricate art nouveau graphic style has become instantly recognisable. Illustrated Oscar Wilde's book of the tale of Salome, and made a large number of pornographic images. Influenced by art of China and Japan as were many at the time, Beardsley's characteristic flat highly decorative black and white pen and ink drawings used patterns on textiles and clothing of his subjects to great effect, and he was an extremely skilled draughtsman. 

!!Medieval & Gothic Art.	
!Beattie Basil.
messy figurative painter of the Glasgow school, born late 1930s died 1990s themes of fishing boats, chip shops and Scottish machismo painted lyrically and colourfully.
!Beban Breda.
UK performance artist born 1950s.
!Bechler Berndt and Hilla. 
German husband and wife working together born around 1950. their work became known in the 1980s series of black and white photos of industrial sites, silos, water towers etc. that imbue the subjects with a formal sculptural quality notable for absence of any form of life.
!Beckman Max.
German painter working in the 1920s and 1930s. Beckman painted in an expressionist style, choosing the people and social spaces of the day, in pre war Berlin. A self portrait of himself standing glaring at the viewer wearing a large black overcoat is particularly characteristic. Beckman used a lot of black to outline his figures. 
!!Arts & Crafts Movement.	
!Beech Amanda.
British artist born 1970s.
!Beecroft Vanessa.
US performance artist who uses professional models to make her room sized installations. The models are chosen for their perfect bodies and dressed alike, usually in underwear or naked but always wearing shoes and make up and usually wigs. In an early work they are wearing yellow bobbed wigs and wearing items of school uniform. A more recent work has natural hair but identical face and body makeup to give them an ethereal gleam, and high heels. The models stand sit or lie, however they feel comfortable, for the duration of the work usually 4 hours, and may engage the viewers eye or not as they chose. They do not speak. Although the viewer is free to wander among them none does as taken as a group this experience is intimidating. This of course is Beecroft's intention, to show that the supposedly objectified naked beautiful bodies of women can, simply by their presentation and context, be rendered very powerful permissively because of our objectification of them and our habit of looking at naked women for pleasure. The control of the situation is given to them by their very muteness, their make up and their beauty, traditionally seen as means of oppression. Of courser there are those that would argue that in appropriating and reusing these means Beecroft is doing no better, merely relying on our curiosity and our desire for vicarious pleasure. 
!Bellmer, Hans.
!!Arts & Crafts Movement.
!Benglis Lydia.
An American sculptor working in the 1970s, Benglis made sculptures from brightly coloured polyurethane foam, poured onto the floor and allowed to expand and cohere.
!Benn Tony.
British figurative conceptual painter born late 1950s.
!Bernini.
Italian baroque painter, made many altarpieces particularly in Venice and Verona, working in the mid 17th century.

!!Arts & Crafts Movement.	
!Beuys Joseph.
Born in early 1930s, One of the most significant German artists of the second half to the 29oth century, He was a professor at the dusseldorf academy for many years, where he had a huge influence over several generations of younger artists. Beuys was an eccentric character who always dressed in the same canvas hat and black canvas shooting waistcoat with multiple pockets. He is extremely prolific, working in all media but chiefly known as a sculptor, performance and installation artist who proclaimed that 'life is art' making his every action part of his work.
Beuys is notorious for the myth of a near death experience that surrounds him and although long since discredited has proved impossible to ignore. It was said that he had been shot down when flying for the Luftwaffe in the second world war over snowy mountains. His life was saved by local villages who found him and kept his body temperature up by smearing him in pig fat and wrapping him in felt. 
Whether apocryphal or not, this event would seem to have had a profound influence on most of Beuys work. His favoured materials are felt and fat. However Beuys personal lexicon is often impenetrable and inaccessible, although s
One of his best known works is Portrait of the Artist Talking to a Dead Hare, which was made for his first solo show in New York in 1979. Beuys sits in the gallery, his head covered in honey and gold leaf (also highly important symbolic substances in his work), cradling a dead hare in his arms talking to it. There is some reference to the city of riches and capitalism in the gold leaf
Politics are a major feature of Beuys work, he is a socialist and an anti-capitalist, (although some claim that he is more of a reactionary). In fact he was sacked from his post at Dussledorf for inciting student riots, although this to is subject to speculation. In his second New York show he made a work with a live wolf. Beuys sat in the gallery behind a chain link fence separating him and the viewer, with a wolf for company to which he talked. The two stayed there for a week. The wolf symbolised the plundering and appropriation of the American wilderness and by his interaction with its spirit Beuys was trying to heal the wounds caused to the indigenous people. 
Sculptures the best known is his Fat Chair, a wooden chair with lard piled at a slant towards the back of it. He made a number of works from stacks of plate steel and felt which he described as batteries, some kind of life preserving power source. A number of vitrines which contained an array of mysterious but apparently utilitarian metal wood fat and felt objects. 
A series of performance had the format of lectures often conducted in a studio, in which he used blackboards to illustrate his talk, usually about the possibility of art being life and in particular to make his famous claim that 'Art is a Social Sculpture'. By this he meant that art could not exist with the interaction of the viewer, it was therefore subjective, and thus a social event. In this sense art was by extension political. The blackboards with their drawings diagrams and writing remained as a document of the lecture.
Beuys made himself a felt suit and various other garments and items, these usually had a cross cut from cotton fabric stitched onto them.
In 1895 Beuys showed in London. He installed rolls of felt the height of the gallery all round the walls and across the entrance, leaving only a small 3 foot high gap from the floor up for the viewer to enter. Inside was a grand piano. A total damped silence was implied by felt and experienced by the deadened acoustic.
VW camper van with a number of wooden sledges emerging from its door, linked by a harness.
5000 trees planted in a small town.
Beuys made many works on paper, using charcoal, paint, ink and in particular a particular brand of rust/dried blood red coloured paint the kind used to preserve sail cloth or paint door steps. The name of the paint and the colour was personally symbolic.
Beuys made a cast of an underpass under a road by pouring melted lard into it and then cutting it out, a work which must have influenced the British sculptor Rachel Whiteread.

!!Arts & Crafts Movement.	
!Bick Andrew.
British artist born late 1960s makes wall relief which have depressions filled with wax and the whole then sanded to a smooth shiny surface.
!Bickerton Ashley.
American Bickerton was part of the Neo Geo group of artists who were working in New York in the 1980s. He made a number of wall mounted sculptures that consisted of closed metal boxes, shallow but projecting some distance from the wall, which he covered with stickers and logos, which gave the sculptures the appearance of both an item of luggage and a sign, its function entirely ambivalent. The stickers themselves were created by Bickerton and were generic types that had no actual reference in the real world to a company, an instruction or an advertisement. Bickerton also made a work in which a life-size rubber shark was hung from the ceiling with block and tackle, hanging from the ropes were also a number of small yachts fenders along with sealed transparent plastic film bags containing some kind of blue gel. This ambiguous work seemed to represent the sea (the blue gel) and its dangers (of yachts shipwrecked, shark attacks), as well as having a particular tough almost fetishistic aesthetic.

!!Arts & Crafts Movement.	
!Bijl Guillaume.
Belgian Bijl is known for his perfect recreations of very ordinary spaces. Each installation he creates in a gallery is a recreation down the last detail of a particular place, for example a gym, a supermarket, a beauty salon, another gallery, a bookshop. These spaces would be usable for their projected purpose, such is the attention to detail, but their remain functionless and empty, and such is their purpose. They are three dimensional facsimiles, all the more unreal for being so real. Bijl is interested in expanding the boundaries of 
!Bik Lisbeth and Van der Pol.
Dutch artist partners who make collaborative investigations of a sociological nature, setting up forums for investigation into contemporary art practises and in particular encouraging and facilitating cross-nationality projects and interaction. 
!Billingham Richard.
British photographer born around 1960 who made a series of photographs of his own family. These reveal an chronically alcoholic father who is either comatose or the life and soul, and an overweight mother who likes to laugh. The pair watch a lot of TV, drink, smoke and play with their other children and their dog. Their house is untidy. The photographs are graphic and show his family for what it is, revealing his parents asleep, happy, sad, playful, and drunk. The degree of intimacy that the viewer is given is startling, and the photographs ask the viewer to consider their own preconceptions and to think about making judgements based on appearance. For on closer inspection, a family that might have been considered dysfunctional appear also to be very happy and loving. The photographs are all taken in the house with ambient light, so often to get the image he want Billingham places the camera low down or high up, using any angle necessary to get the part of the room or the number of people he wants into view. They have an immediacy, an unstudied air, yet the series as whole is a comprehensive insight into other peoples life. 
Billingham followed the photographs with a film, made in the same way, which reveals that the father is evidently going to die of smoking related disease, and that the younger brother is very good at speaking to camera. Bellingham's work is characterised by its combination of casualness and thoughtfulness. It could not have been made by anyone other than a family member, for it would have been intrusive, vicarious. Equally it could not have been made unless the convention of fly on the wall documentary had been established and a fascination for the minutiae of ordinary live become commonplace. Billingham was one of the first artists to combine this with portrait photography.
!Birnbaum Dara.
US performance artist known for her performance in which she dressed as wonder woman. 

!!Arts & Crafts Movement.	
!Bjornsdottir Olaf.
Blake Peter
British pop artist working from the 1960s onwards, Blake made figurative paintings that are very detailed. They often contain elements of patterning, decorative borders and are meticulously painted. Blake was chosen by the Beatles to paint the cover image of their Sargent Pepper album, depicting the band members dressed in uniform, amongst a group of fabulously dressed people. He often chose to portray British national identity in some way. He included a self portrait in many paintings - he always appears with long hair and a long beard. Blake is still painting in the 2000s.
Blake William
English poet and artist known for his visionary drawings and for his illustrated poetry books the Songs of Innocence and the Songs Of Experience. Made a drawing with watercolour of God measuring the world with a pair of compasses which has been much reproduced.
!Bleckner Ross.
Bleckner one of a number of painters in working in New York in the 1980s and early 90s making monumental scale works. Seminal solo exhibition at the Guggenheim in 1992 in which he showed a number abstract works which looked like starry pieced domes, wavy stripes with ribbon rosettes dotted among them and fuzzy chandelier and flower like compositions. Also works on paper. Easy to interpret Bleckner's work as having a memorial quality - this the era when many leading figures in the visual arts died from AIDS related illness.

!!Arts & Crafts Movement.
!Boccioni Umberto.
Italian futurist artist born around 1890 working in the 1920sadn 30s, Boccioni one of the leaders of this movement, which rejoiced in modern design and futuristic ideas, much of the work dealing with how to represent speed in two or three dimensions. A bronze sculpture about one metre high called simply 'Speed' of a striding man, with finlike structures representing trails of movement leading backwards from his limbs and the back of his head. Giving the figure a sinister warrior like quality which given the futurists association with fascism?? may or may not have been accidental.
A head of Mussolini, made by modelling a profile from a photograph and transferring this to a piece of wood and using the profile to turn the wood, resulting in a very odd but inspired object looking like a strange vase but with the unmistakeable profile of a man from every angle.
Also many paintings of the city (Milan) usually with lines to represent movement. 
!Bochner Mel.
Dull coloured semi-abstract paintings of city scapes in a geometric hard edged style, 1930s -40s.
!Bocklin Arnold.
1860-70 romantic landscapes idyllic pastorals, shepherdesses and swains in ribboned clothes with the occasional piece of statuary, the trees painted in great detail.

!!Arts & Crafts Movement.	
!Boetti Alighiero.
Italian artist born early in the century working between the 1960s and 90s, Boetti made quite a lot of wall hangings using embroidery, chiefly maps of the world, but also tapestry panels showing the letters of the alphabet. Naming and writing were his interests and also the time consuming handiwork of embroidery and tapestry along with the very similar method of using the ballpoint pen to colour large areas. He also made a series of drawings in ball point pen of invisible words. Reading from key along the top and sides of the drawing it is possible tot discern the words in the drawings by referring to inverted commas on the grid of the drawing. The whole paper is coloured by intensive use of the blue or red ballpoint, leaving only the inverted commas white. Boettis work seems somehow anti-art, using craft techniques and the tool of the scribble the ball point pen.
!Bohm Katrin.
German artist born in 1970s who made social environments as gallery installations. Bohm designed a colour coordinated café/meeting/waiting space, and with various printed paper items, paper cups pens to match, and placed literature and other printed material in the space. An anthropological sociological interest is the main part of her work in which the viewer is made into a participant. 
!Boltanski Christian.
East? German? Artist who made large scale installation and site specific works particularly interested in socio-political issues, in the memorial, and in the legacy left for the living by the dead. One work was sited in a gap in a terrace of houses, a bombed out house never rebuilt. Boltanski discovered the names of the people who had lived in the house and inscribed them on the walls which still retained details of the interior of the house such as fireplaces, wall paper and paint. 
Leather suitcases WW2 aesthetic.

!!Arts & Crafts Movement.	
!Bolton Nick.
British artist who has made installation and video, born in the 1960s. A telephone box with etched glass has a sensor attached to the mouthpiece. When someone speaks on the phone the light in the phone box becomes brighter or dimmer related to the pitch of the speakers voice. 
!Bonham Carter Eliza.
British artist born early 1960s painted abstract works often using blobs and dots, investigation paint and surface and simplification of colour. 
!Bonnard Pierre.
French painter 1890s known for his domestic interiors painted in warm and subtle shades with soft dabbing brushstrokes, and his attention to the pattern and detail of the textiles in the room as part of the whole composition. A woman seated at a table at the top of the canvas, the table extending towards the bottom, a solitary dreamlike quality of week day afternoon to the image. Perspective in Bonnard's work always slightly odd, elongated, seeming to be designed to draw the viewer in and give the impression both of welcome and of distance.
!Bontecou Lee.
Working in the 1960s and 70s Bontecou made wall based constructions from metal, acrylic sheet, perspex and rivets. Often these were flower like but due to their materials their appearance was more hard core, more like an exploded aircraft fuselage.
!Borland Christine.
Scottish artist born around 1970 who made a number of works featuring hand guns. She displayed a police blanket with a bullet hole in it. She presented a caravan in a gallery which contained some evidence elf a crime or the suggestion that a crime could be committed, with a handgun lying on a table. Borland's work displays an interest in how material evidence can be represented as an art work and in how that visual evidence can be used by the viewer to construct a narrative. 
!Bosch Hieronymous.
The Garden of Earthly Delights is an extremely well known painting. It is a small triptych approximately 70 cm tall with a squarish central panel and two rectangular side panels. Bosch's Painting depicts paradise to be an extraordinary place, with dreamlike creatures and objects, some beautiful pink glass spheres, some castles and towers. It could be said to be one of the precursor to the fantasy and science fiction form for its fantastical creations are wholly of the imagination. The painting is very detailed in its composition and painted with the smallest of brushes. 

!!Arts & Crafts Movement.	
!Botticelli Sandro.
Italian painter working around1540 best known for his Nativity and Venus, and also for a drawing cycle depicting the various levels of heaven and hell. The Venus is one of the most recognised images in the western world, and beyond thanks to its frequent use in advertising. The very beautiful Venus is standing in a giant clam shell which floats on the sea, just away from the shore. She is naked but her long hair covers her pubic area. She is surrounded by cherubs who pull the clam shell along by blue ribbons. Pale pink roses fall around her from the sky. The whole painting is rendered in luminous pale colours, blues, pinks and sand colours. 
The nativity a small painting about 50 cm tall is set in a forested landscape, with a timber and straw shelter in the centre of the picture which houses the Holy family. The shelter has no walls. The Mary is seated with Jesus on her lap. Joseph kneels beside her. The shepherds are there. The ox and ass are in the shadows at the back of the stable. Above the thatched roof are angels, arranged in a row, some blowing trumpets or playing harps, their feet dangling, their softly coloured red blue and purple robes falling in folds around them, with gilded belts and halos hovering. Above the angels heaven can be seen though breaks in the clouds, and there are cherubs everywhere. Below the stable is a twisting path with leads to the bottom of the painting crossing horizontally, turning and recrossing, until the flames at the mouth of hell are reached. All along the path are devils poking out of burrows enticing lost souls, they have black skin, horns and forked tails.
The drawing cycle shows the different levels of purgatory and the crimes associated with them and the particular torture or punishment. Each level is then shown in detail with souls in torment suffering accordingly. The route to heaven is then shown culminating in the entry in to heaven, which is a beautiful garden. The drawings are made in dark brown ink and are very detailed. They were originally presented as a book.  

!!Ashcan School	.
!Bourgeois Louise.
Bourgeois is an American sculptor born in the 1920s. She has had one of the longest careers of any female artists of her generation. Bourgeois has made works that are both intimate and monumental in scale. She is ahs made carved and cast sculpture and installations. Notable her carved marble works of the 50s and 60s often table top, organic curvy shapes suggestive of the inside of the body or of plant growth. One in pink marble. Installations include room structures that have furniture and objects in them. Her work has a strong female sensibility. Most recently she has made a monumental 30m high bronze spider. Bourgeois has many repeatedly used motifs, the shoe, the spider etc 
!Bowery Leigh.
British fashion designer, club promoter and artist whose work defies definition but was very influential. Bowery died in the 1990s in his late thirties. Bowery always wore his own designs, usually involving heavily padded lycra to change his shape substantially, mask like make up often with big black eyes, rubber and fetish wear, extremely high heeled shoes and boots. His look morphed between male and female, sexual and asexual. His club night Taboo inspired a generation of people to dress up, and Bowery became an icon for many. Bowery exhibited himself in the window of a London gallery, a living work of art. 
!Boyce Sonia.
British artist working in the 1980s onwards who made work dealing with racial awareness and black identity. 

!!Ashcan School.	
!Bradshaw Philippe.
British artist born in the 1960s who makes large scale installations often using chain curtains. These have photographic imagery on them made using a commercial technique of using different coloured links to make the image. An installation in New York in a darkened room contained several curtains some with photographs on, one with a 19th landscape on, another with a Franz Hals painting on, place around the space in the centre of which was a trampoline. Video monitors displayed a montage of imagery and also a film of Bradshaw jumping on the trampoline naked, which has been a performance as part of the installation. The effect was that of multiple images, hard to grasp (the chain curtain images are hard to see at close quarters), disorientating but visually very rich.
!Brakhrage Stan.
Late twentieth century American film maker 

!!Ashcan School.	
!Brancusi Constantin.
Eastern European sculptor who lived and worked in paris at the end of the 19th century. Brancusi made a lifelong investigation of the plinth as a sculptural form. His works were often no more than elaborated plinth shapes, with similar forms placed on them. Plinth and sculpture becoming one. Brancuse worked in plaster, bronze, wood and marble. One of his best known works is Endless Column, a polished bronze column on a wooden plinth made of truncated three dimensional diamond shapes placed on top of the other, about 10 metres high. He also made a small carved head of a sleeping person which is so smooth and almost featureless as to almost appear to be a large stone. Brancusi's studio can still be visited in Paris, it has been preserved as it was.
!Brandt.
German photographer who made many photographic images that are know very well known. 

!!Ashcan School.	
!Braque Georges. 
French artist born around 1880 who along with Picasso was a major exponent of Cubism. Beginning as a painter of landscapes and portraits, Braque made a painting with a piece of collage in 1911 Still Life with Guitar, which was of the paintings which initiated the development of cubism. He depicted a table a bottle and a guitar as if there were no conventional perspective and represented them by flat planes and areas and shapes of colour, including famously a piece of newspaper. By this action he began a revolution in painting, and the possibility of making conceptual painting was born. No one had ever stuck a piece of found paper to a canvas as part of the image before. The newspaper signified the prescience of a newspaper in the still life, but was not a newspaper and did not look like one. However it was enough to create an image. Braque's achievement was to ignore conventional perspective and the realist reproduction of form and represent form by other means. Including collage, using old tickets, printed paper (in one painting he uses paper printed with a rattan pattern to signify a cane chair), in another a piece of wood effect paper for a guitar for example. He made many such collages often of bottles, tabletops, wine glasses, with the planes of the objects opened out and repositioned, before going on, as did Picasso to attempt the same thing in paint.
The challenge in painting was to represent all the planes of three dimensional objects on a two dimensional plane, to think in terms of the surfaces of a cube for everything. This route had already been followed by Cézanne, who was the most important influence on the Cubists. This was a radical restructuring of pictorial space. The resulting paintings were made in browns and greys initially, and Braque often used an elliptical canvas. They gave the impression of crystalline forms with recognisable elements attached, such as a head, an eye, part of a guitar, the side of a bottle, the front of a table, the back of a chair. 
Sculptures?
Gradually Braque began to make freer images, the effect of cubism had been to free the picture plane from the constraints of realistic representation and pictorial space. The surface of the canvas became the pictorial space, so that the painting was both a representation and an exploration of surface. 
!Bratby John.
British painter working in the 1960s and 70s, one of a group known as kitchen sink painters for their choice of domestic subject matter. Bratbys interiors showed his own home and family, painted with thickly encrusted painted often squeezed direct from the tube and with a palette knife, in an almost naïve style.
!Breakwell Ian.
British artist whose career began in the 1970s, Breakwell is best known for his written diaristic works. He made a number works with large amounts of densely handwritten text, often detailing his own life and observations about life. He also used photographs. In the 1980s he made a performance in which the audience was confronted with a stage curtain. When it opened they were faced with a painted audience and the back of a proscenium arch, and in fact they themselves were on stage.
!Breton Andre.
Most outspoken member and leader of the surrealists in Paris at the beginning of the twentieth century. Breton made paintings and sculpture, and wrote the Surrealist manifesto which set out to define a new kind of art for new times. His best known work is a clothes iron with spikes set into it. Elephant vacuum?

!!Ashcan School	.
!Breughel Peter the elder.
Dutch medieval painter 1400s, world famous for his instantly recognisable paintings of the seasons, for example Hunters in the Snow, and there is one showing the summer harvest, one showing spring and one autumn life. In each case paintings show a village scene, with everyday life going on, a large number of peasants, children, domestic and farm animals, buildings. There is activity in every corner of the painting, down to the smallest detail such as a person urinating, or a dog stealing some meat, a couple kissing, children being naughty, someone sleeping. The scenes are realistically painted for the time and are notable for their depiction of the lives of ordinary people with no imposed narrative, no moral or religious overtones, no theme other than the representation of life as it was. The colours, the drawing of landscape, vernacular, architecture , the detail of the clothing, of tools, house hold items, makes these works extraordinary documents of their time. Above all they present four very different atmospheres and moods. The paintings are so famous as to be instantly recognisable whether or not the painters name is known, and to be used on calendars and other merchandise, and in advertising the world over. Details from the paintings are frequently extracted and used in this way.
!Breughel Peter the younger.

!!Ashcan School.	
!Brietz, Candice.
Artist born in 1970s
!Broodthaers Marcel.
The work of Marcel Broodthaers occupy an eccentric personal world which centres around his Musée des Aigles, and the mussel shell. A Belgian artist working in the 50s and 60s Broodthaers was something of a surrealist, with his use of puns and irony, and juxtaposition of unlikely objects. Joseph Beuys work has similar visual qualities to that of Broodthaers, as does his creation of a fake institution and the didactic ( if ironically so) aspirations of his work. He created his own sometimes impenetrable lexicon of signs and symbols, and indeed signs were part of his work, he made several signs displaying diagrammatic objects such as a pipe, with 'fig.1', 'fig 2' etc underneath he signs were pressed sheet metal reliefs. He made a number of small sculptures and wall reliefs using mussel shells (possibly as an emblem of Belgian nationality) stuck together. The Musée des Aigles - French for eagle but also a pun on something else like epaulet - contained everything the artist had collected with eagles wings, such as military crests, logos and such like. All Broodthaers work has a spare, monochrome appearance.
!Brown Cecily.
British artist born in the 1970s Brown paints very large splashy, dribbly and apparently messy works with tightly controlled colours choices. At first glance these appear to be abstract expressionistic paintings but almost immediately they reveal themselves to be figurative. Hidden in the mass of brush marks and paint splashes is a meticulously constructed figure, or figures often in pornographic poses. The works therefore sets up an expectation into eh viewer and then almost immediately confounds it. It also makes an analogy with abstract expressionism and male sexual gratification. 
!Brown Glenn.
Brown is known for his excessively meticulous paintings that reproduce exactly other works of art, or more accurately that reproduce reproductions of other works of art. Brown scales up a reproduction, chosen from among many all of which are different in colour due to the printing processes. He then paints this reproduction faithfully in oil paint, using the tiniest of brushes, reproducing not only what the work depicts but also the actual brushstrokes, giving the painting a trompe l'oeil quality. In fact it is debatable whether Browns paintings are copies our trompe l'oeil since they do seduce the viewer into thinking that their surface is thick paint rather than flat and smooth. This is particularly evident in a series of de Kooning copies, where the thickly encrusted paint is entirely realistic. However on closer inspection the 'impasto' has a plasticised quality. Browns de Kooning series culminated in a number of painted 'lumps' - apparently lumps of paint palette scrapings which are probably what do Kooning used to have in his studio but in fact bronze casts painted by brown to give the illusion of paint scrapings. Brown subsequently copied Fragonard's Boy in a Hat, and girl on a swing, which he showed upside down, and a number of science fiction paintings by Chris Foss, which were the subject of a copyright legal action. Browns work deals with reproduction and its importance in the dissemination of the images, question whether what people know best is the image itself or its reproduction, and questioning the importance of the hand of the artist. His main idea is to make painting the subject of itself
!Bulatov, Eric.
Russian artist working in the 1980s and 90s who combines socialist realist imagery, blue skies, fields, with large text painted across the image.

!!Ashcan School.	
!Bulloch Angela.
British artist born in the late 1960s, Bulloch's sculptures and installations deal with the social structures of society, the rules by which we live and the deconstruction of art and image making. Bulloch's 90s works include a mudslinging machine which created a mud spatter 'painting' on the wall, a drawing machine which drew a blue spattered line along a wall. These machines were viewer activated in some way. Often a piece of furniture designed by the artist would trigger the machines to work if sat on. The machines would be presented in an environment which invited comptemplation, the artist would fill a space with bean bags made to her design, often large enough to seat groups of people. The bean bags symbolised communality, and were a striking alternative to the customary stand and don't touch regulations in galleries. Bulloch was one of a number of artists in the 90s who were exploring the relationship of the viewer to art but more particularly to the institutional context in which they found it. She questioned the social norms and the normalising structures in which we live by presenting such structures in new ways.
Her Rules works are an example of this - presenting rules designed for specific purposes as if they are general rules to live by, rules that may be written in a small book are put on a wall using transfer lettering, giving them a perverse authority
In early 2000s Bulloch made some small sculptures out of chewed gum which was then cast and painted. She continued her series of works made from pixel boxes, an innovation of her own which consists of a wooden box with one opaque acrylic face, inside which is a light source with the capacity to change colour infinitely. This is linked to a computer, which is able to control the change of light colours, using as its instructions of the changes the pixels in a video image, or a piece of music. Bulloch stacks the pixel boxes vertically in a variety of formations and also horizontally to create the effect of an illuminated dance floor and minimal abstract sculpture. In the latter case the pixels were controlled by sound. Bulloch often works with sound, and in 2003 she made a number of small sculptural objects, smooth amorphous shapes sprayed with white lacquer, which on handling revealed an inbuilt and incongruous means of generating sound, perhaps in response to light levels for example.]
!Burden Chris.
Burden became known in the late 60s early 70s for his performance work mostly involving physical endurance. In 'Shoot' he had a friend shoot him in the arm in the gallery at a specified time. The shooting was documented and like all Burdens works of the period the documentation became the work. He was not seriously injured. In Locker Piece he had himself locked in a left luggage locker at a railway station for 8 hours. In Freeway he lay in the middle of a freeway. He also had himself nailed to the bonnet of a VW Beetle through his hands and feet. Burdens was interested in making formal sculptural work using his own body and in the visual power of pain and danger. The purity and simplicity of the works made them very powerful. His later work he developed an interest in war and military capability though his pacifist beliefs and in environmental damage. A work involving hundreds of tiny model submarines, a large meteorite like lump suspended from the gallery ceiling with model railway track running all over it and in and out of it. A large and complex computer controlled machine for making and throwing paper aeroplanes.

!!Ashcan School.	
!Buren Daniel.
Buren painted lozenge shapes on buildings and architectural structures, making site specific works that use the lozenge shapes as a visual intervention to prompt a reconsideration of the scene presented to the viewer, and attempt to alter the reading of the picture plane, treating an environment as if it were no more than a photograph. The lozenges allude to signage and logos are entirely without function. Buren's work is as much to do with reconsidering landscape painting as it is do with installation.
!Burgin Victor.
American artist who made conceptual work in from the 1960s onwards with a strong theoretical slant evident both in his work and in his writing about art.
!Burr Tom.
American artist working in the 1990s onwards.
!Burton Scott.
American artist who made work with furniture.

!!Harlem Renaissance.	
!Bustin Jane.
British painter born 1960s makes severe abstract works that are both investigations into the effect of colour and pigment, surface and also into votive painting and the painting as symbolic or spiritual object of contemplation. Bustin uses natural colours, dark reds, blues, black white. There is never a figurative element in her paintings, merely subtle shifts in tone that may hint at a from. 
!Byars James Lee.
Byers worked in the 1960s onwards. One sculpture is a clear acrylic case, containing white sand, a white book, and a cream coloured (almost white) snake. the work can be recreated anywhere as long as the artists instructions are followed, he specifies the white sand, the dimensions of case and book, which must be made by a bookbinder and that the snake be as close to white as is available. 

!Cahun Claude.
French photographer working in the 20s and 30s, who made a number of self portraits printed very small, dressed often as a man without disguising her sexual identity.
!Caivano Varda.
Painter working in the early 2000s. Caivano paints still lives that have a look of late 19th and early 20th century.
!Calame Ingrid.
Calame's apparently abstract paintings are in fact take from the outlines of stains she finds on the street and in public places. She photographs the ground and then draws the outlines of the stains, then paints the canvas in subtle colours to create an abstract image from something very mundane and ephemeral.

!!Harlem Renaissance.
!Calder Alexander.
British sculptor working in the 1940s to 60s who became best known for his kinetic sculpture and mobiles. One of the very few artist to have used the mobile successfully as a form in sculpture. Calder's sculptures generally use circles spheres and triangular shapes, often the triangles have curved sides, and rods. They are metal, painted typically in black white with red yellow and blue. 
!.Callan John
British sculptor born in 1960s who pushed paint through pin pricks following the line of pages of text in an open book to create painted text. Built a small house or dog kennel out of bricks and mortar. 
!Calle Sophie.
French artist born in the 1950s, Calle has made a large body of project and research based work. Her Following Piece is perhaps her best known work. In this performative project, made in Venice she selected a man to follow for a month. He never became aware of her constant presence until the project was over. Calle adopted the techniques of undercover surveillance in her project and kept a detailed diary with photographs, which she made into a series of text panels and presented as a documentary installation. For another incognito work, Chambermaid, Calle got a job as a chambermaid in a hotel. She searched the rooms and luggage that she cleaned and made lists of what she found and what she deduced about the occupants of the room - the kind of people they were, what their occupations were, why they were staying in the hotel. She photographed the rooms and things in them that interested her. This work was presented as text and image on the wall. Calle's interest in these works was in what we can discover about an absent subject from the visual world that surrounds them and in how we can reconstitute that subject. This process gives rise to an intense awareness our own subjectivity which is included in the final work by the use of her own voice in the text of the work. The viewer of the work is made aware of their position as voyeur which they share with the artist.
Calle subsequently continued her interest in subjectivity but began to work with people rather than observing them unseen. The Blind involved asking blind from birth and those who had lost their sight since birth to describe images. These descriptions are presented in place of images on the walls of a gallery giving a privileged place to the images of the minds eye, images that would never normally become concrete.
For a similar work made with Museum attendants Calle asked those who worked in a certain museum to describe the paintings that observed daily in the course of their employment when those paintings were not present because they were on loan. The resulting descriptions were placed on the wall in the place of the loaned exhibit. The discrepancies in the descriptions made the viewers subjectivity very obvious; descriptions of the same work would vary greatly, placing an object in a painting that was not there for example, or adding something new to a painting, changing the composition of the colours. 
!Callery Simon.
British artist born around 1960 Callery made a series of white paintings of banal urban landscapes in the early 1990s which relied on impasto and tiny amounts of colour in the white to create the almost intangible image.

!!Harlem Renaissance.
!Canaletto.
Italian artist who was working in the mid sixteenth century. He is world famous for his panoramic scenes of Venice, the grand canal and its palazzos with water traffic passing, painted in very accurate detail and bathed in a golden sunlight. He subsequently spent some time in London and painted the Thames river front in a similar way, including the Royal Naval College at Greenwich, St Paul's Cathedral. Canaletto's painting are among the most frequently stolen in the world
!Canova.
Classical sculptor - his Three Graces - 5 foot high white marble of 3 women in flowing robes holding hands in an circle, was stolen.
!Cantor Ellen.
British artist born in the 1960s who makes video and drawings.
!Caravaggio.
Italian artist classical painter who invented chiaroscuro

!!Harlem Renaissance.
!Cardiff Janet and Georges Bures Miller.
Canadian artist and musician/sound engineer partner working in from the 1990s onwards. Cardiff made a work for the Whitechapel Library in London which took the viewer on a walking tour - the viewer took a personal cd player which directed their steps and used sound to interpret and accompany what they were seeing. She made a gallery installation with a choir in which the choir members, performing a medieval choral work, were recorded individually, and then played through individual speakers placed on speaker stands at ear height in a circle in the gallery. Thus the viewer could choose how to experience the work by where they stand, and hear each voice individually. This gave a sense of what it is like to be part of a choir, and also a sense of the physical space which a choir occupies and how that space is experienced aurally. The gallery space is also articulated by where the sound is coming from - this varies according to whether the whole choir is singing, or just the sopranos in one segment of the circle, or a few of each type of voice dotted round the circle. The work give the non participant a participatory experience and inverts the performer listener relationship. 
!Carnegie Gillian.
British artist born in the late 1960s who began her career in the 1990s. Carnegie makes paints in two distinct ways. She paints her own and other female bodies, nearly always the back view mainly featuring the buttocks, in a realist way using muted lifelike colours. These paintings are small, about 40cm high. She also paints landscapes in extremely thick impasto, the canvases ranging from 40 cm to 150 cm high. These landscapes are usually woodland scenes, sometimes with lakes, rarely featuring people. The painting is sometimes squeezed straight from the tube. Close to the image is nearly impossible to read, in particular in the paintings which are predominantly one colour, often blacks or very dark colours, appearing as if at night. In these paintings the image is revealed by the sheen on the squeezes and smears of the paint, the texture and the shadow created. In other landscapes more typical colours are used, blues, browns and greens, but in all the landscapes the vegetation is rendered in detail, as is the bark of trees and the ripples on water. There is a sinister atmosphere to the images, although they appear timeless there is somehow the implication of a contemporary narrative. Similarly with the nudes, although a traditional subject, the fact that they are often self portraits coupled with her obsession with bottoms, gives a contemporary twist  to the sexual projection of these images and hints at both onanism and voyeurism
Carnegie subsequently began to paint floral still lives, using a much lighter palette although still restrained, in which the background and any vessels holding the flowers are painted smoothly and the flowers rendered in Carnegie's thick impasto and squeezings, a few judiciously placed ones making very convincing flowers. Carnegies paintings to date make an investigation into the history of painting styles and subject matters, subverting her traditional subject matter by making anachronistic and unexpected justaposition of style and subject matter. 
!!Harlem Renaissance.
!Caro Antony.
British artist who began his career in the 1950s becoming very well known in the 1960s for his welded steel sculptures. Died at the very end of the twentieth century?? Caro was the most successful of a group of British sculptors who made large scale abstract steel sculptors in the 1960s and early 1970s. These were either cut out of steel plate, or made of round and square cross section steel tubes and rods and I-beams. They were sometimes left to rust, but sometimes spray painted primary colours. Caro was one of the first sculptors to make semi-abstract works on such a large scale. It was really only Henry Moore who had attempted this in Britain but his work was much more or
Caro was influenced by the scale of ambition of his American contemporaries but his subject matter was initially the English landscape. His sculptures although they appear abstract depict landscapes. Caro used steel to make very open structures, often rather long and low, about twelve metres long and 2 metres high, that describe a kind of vista in space. One might be painted bright green, another bright yellow. Smaller works might be made from shapes cut from sheet steel put together. The ragged edge from the cutting heat tool or saw is often left unfinished.
In the 1990s Caro made a number of small steel sculptures of a chair based on the chair in Van Gogh's painting of his own bedroom. Caro became synonymous with a school of sculpture that was predominant in Britain for a decade, not least due to his years of teaching at St Martins school of art in London, then a leading sculpture school. This type of sculpture was mainly made by men and it began to be less popular as the effects of 1970s feminist activism in visual art took hold in the 1980s. Furthermore the status of the antonymous art object began to be questioned during this decade. 


!!Realism.
!Carter Tony.
British artist born around 1950. In the 1980s Carter made a number of installation works, based around an existing narrative or historical event and highly theorised, for which he created highly finished elements often including printed text and drawings. One such work contained the silver buttons from an eighteenth century character's jacket, for which he cast some silver buttons. Carter gave minute attention to the display of the elements of his installations, fabricating highly finished display cases and plinths.
!Carty Kirsten.
German artist born who makes intricate drawings in pen featuring women, landscapes, clothes, buildings and plants. The drawings have a decadent atmosphere.

!!Realism.
!Carvahlo Melanie.
British artist who is interested in how people conceptualise their world. In a work from 2002 she invited a large number of people from all walks of life to make a painting of 'home'. She displayed the resulting works in a gallery as part of an installation. Carvahlo also makes complex photocollages that include people buildings and brightly coloured exotic flowers and sunsets.
!Casebeere James.
Casebeere made a series of photographs in the late 1980s of scenes that he had constructed entirely from cut, folded and shaped paper. For example a rural scene with a river, trees and a canoe. This is photographed in black and right. There is not a particular attempts at realism or trompe l'oeil as in the later work of Thomas Demand, rather the scenes a combination of fairytale and cartoon, given a sombre seriousness by the use of black and white. This then relates them to early twentieth century American landscape photography.
!Catttalan Maurizio. 
Sculptor and installation artist who uses stuffed animals in his work. Hung a stuffed horse from ceiling in a horse sling, stuffed to look slumped and therefore very realistic, as if it were either dead or tranquillised? An effigy of the pope toppling to the floor pierced by a crucifix. A table football game for two teams of 11 to play simultaneously, a squirrel slumped at a tiny table, a gun on the table an obvious suicide. A small boy wearing a hooded sweatshirt sits at a school desk and has speared a pencil through his hand. Cattalan's works is often intended to be disturbing and provocative. 
A large format photograph of the back of the Hollywood sign reversed so that it reads the right way, apparently installed in a mountainous area, it is unclear whether a huge deconstruction was undertaken to make the photograph or whether it is digitally created

!!Realism.
!Caulfield Patrick.
British artist working from the 1950s onwards who is known for his very distinctive hard edged representative paintings. Caulfield's subject is architecture and the interior particularly the domestic or leisure interior. He chose to paint interiors or elements from interiors such as furniture, lighting, ceramics, and developed a way of making his paintings that he never deviated from. Caulfield takes a photograph and copies its most basic structure rendering forms with the minimum of line possible. He treats light and shadow as a solid object and draws it in the same way. Thus the light from a table lamp will be represented as a solid yellow shape, the shadow behind its shade as a black shape. All the objects in a painting are given equal importance, since every element is treated the same. The outlines are painted with a schematic, dramatically simplified line, in black and the objects, walls, floors, light fittings, furniture filled in bright colours. The black lines are vaguely reminiscent of the lead in a stained glass window, yet they also call to mind Matisse's black outlines. The acrylic paint is applied entirely flat, the edge of every shape outlined in black, the edge of every colour hard and smooth although not made by masking. Colours are every hue and shade, bright, sober, pale and intense.
Caulfield had several favourite items, the lamp and the vase among them. He made many small paintings around 50cm high of one or two items, as well as many of entire interiors on a larger scale usually two metres high or more. He favoured the portrait format. His paintings can be defined as still lives and interiors much in the manner of seventeenth century  Dutch artists, and he painted the aspirations of an equivalent social group in his own day. Modern design, the latest in home interiors and fittings featured in his paintings. 
Caulfield's best known works are some of the simple still lives, like a single lamp, a goldfish in a bowl, an ashtray with a cigarette, a vase, an oval mirror which somehow conveys the idea that it is reflective even though it is painted in black and white. The schematic, iconographic way these things are painted makes deceptively simple to look at. 
Of his larger works, perhaps the interiors of a Swiss bar is the best known. This interior is painted mainly in blue (with the usual black outline) which signifies the quality of light in the place rather than the materials of which the furniture is made. In this Caulfield uses another characteristic technique, he paints the photo mural on the wall behind the banquette seating realistically, in that it looks like a view of mountain scenery rather than a schematic. This is the only element in the painting that he renders in this way. This idea pays homage to Braque and Picasso, who collaged printed material or imagery onto their canvases as part of a cubist painting. There are other examples that make this more explicit, for example where Caulfield paints a piece of wood grain realistically (in direct appreciation of the Braque, who stick a piece of wood grain onto a canvas to signify a guitar. He also paints the pattern of textiles in an interior in this way. But only ever one element in the whole composition is painted realistically.
Caulfield never painted a person. 
!Cellini Benvenuto.
Italian renaissance sculptor and goldsmith who around 1540 made a bronze statue of the biblical David with which he attempted to rival Michelangelo. He also made a bronze of Medusa. Cellini worked for the Medici's who ruled Florence and he as well known for his skill in the techniques required to make precious objects. Particularly well known is an extravagant salt cellar in the form of a calm shell with Neptune and many sea nymphs. This was stolen in 2003. Cellini wrote an outspoken and lengthy autobiography as a vehicle for his evidently large ego, which was ultimately his undoing, as he fell into a long running dispute with the other sculptors of the Medici court about whose was the best statue of David.
!Celmins V J.
Artist born in the 1940s or 50s who has made a large number of paintings and drawings of the sky and the ground. Celmins paints on small landscape format canvases about 60 cm wide or slightly more, using very small brushes. Or makes a drawing of a similar size using pencil. In either case she will draw the most minimal view - a patch of dust on the ground with a few tiny chips of gravel becomes as important as if it were the surface of the moon. She draws the surface of the moon. A tiny part of the night sky becomes a deep blue painting g of tiny diamonds. Celmins work brings the minute and the gigantic together but the works have a deceptively modest unassuming appearance. They are painstakingly detailed in their execution. 

!!Realism.
!Cézanne Paul.
Known as the father of modernist painting, Cézanne was a French painter working in the mid-nineteenth century. He lived in Paris and the south of France in a house called Jas de Buffon in provence. The Provencal countryside featured in much of his work and Cézanne liked to work out of doors as much as he could. He also painted still lives and portraits. 
Cézanne was working around the same time as the impressionists, but his ideas took him on a very different route. He had no interest in creating an impression, in depicting light, in optical fragmentation of the image. Rather he was concerned with how the three dimensional world could be rendered on a two dimensional plane. Cézanne was one of the first artist to paint a representative image giving as much importance to the picture plane as to the illusory space of the painting. In his landscapes and still lives he considered how much of an object he could paint, seeing no reason not to paint the parts of an object that could not be seen, to bend perspective, to remake nature. He composed his paintings so that the picture plane seemed to come towards the viewer, using judicious touches of white to control the path of the viewers eye. It is in this that he was revolutionary and laid the ground for Picasso and Braque to develop Cubism, for as young artists they were astonished by what Cézanne had done. He gave them the idea that a three dimensional object could be rendered in two dimensions not by creating an illusion, but by unfolding its various planes and presenting them with no relation to the actual physical integrity of the object. 
Cézanne was also daring in his use of colour. He never covered the ground of the canvas completely, always leaving parts of it bare white to function as a part of the painting as a whole. He applied colour with an abstract sensibility, for its own sake as part of the painting as a whole, rather than as a part of a faithful depiction. He used the juxtaposition of pure colours to create shadows of other colours.
A number of paintings are immediately associated with Cézanne. The Bathers (a number of works bear this title) are a group of female nudes in a variety of poses, their bodies represented as planes in a landscape. The painting is brown and green the bodies flesh coloured. This is Cézannes best known and least understood work, and it is the work which has the most influence on other artists. His still lives of oranges and apples are also characteristic, as are some of his portraits, for example the woman with a green face (the green representing the shadow cast on her face by the hat she was wearing. Most of his paintings are fairly small, under a metre high.
He painted the land around his country home endlessly, including the water cistern, many trees including an almond tree in blossom, views from the house. He often painted his wife, including a notable painting of her in the bath under greenish water.
!Chadwick Helen.
British artist born in the late 1950s, died about 1998. Chadwick made sculptural installations and photographic work, often combining the two. Her work dealt with the female body and ideal beauty. One work consisted of light boxes on plinths with photographic images of luxurious and sensual arrangements of hair, ribbon and entrails, length of intestine for example, braided together. Chadwick often associated the visceral with the luxurious, the interior of the body with the its clothed exterior. She was regarded as a feminist artist and in common with other women artist of her generation produced much work dealing with the female body. Another work consisted of a series of wooden boxes of different shape and dimensions, produced to correspond with the size of her own body at various ages in her life. Thus the box for her birth is new born child sized, another is curved as if a child were curled up, others are standing adult sized. The boxes have photographic transfers in black ink of images of Chadwick at these different ages. They stand in a group. Around the walls of the space in which the boxes are installed are wooden panels with similar images with Latin texts running round the four edges of the panels. The texts describe the ages of a woman. 
The work for which Chadwick is best known is probably Piss Flowers. These are painted casts taken from the space made in snow when Chadwick and her male partner urinated in it. When cast as a positive this space is revealed to have a central column going down and a petal like circle surrounding it, made by the splashes of hot urine on the snows surface and the main stream melting deep into the snow. The male 'flower' has a much wider petal arrangement and a shorter 'stalk'. The female 'flower' is the opposite, a result which fired Chadwick's interest. The Piss Flowers are a nod to Duchamp's casts of the negative space of male and female genitalia.

!!Realism.
!Chadwick Lynn.
British artist who worked in bronze, making figurative sculpture from the 1950s to the 1980s. Chadwicks bronzes range from life size to very small around 30 cm high human figures. These are angulare, with stick like legs and flattened irregualar trapezoid bodies. The heads of the figures are often pyramid or cube shaped to denote female and male figures. Chadewick was interested in the difference between male and female forms body language. The bronzes mostly have a blue green coppery patina. 
!Chagall Marc.
French artist born in 1880 who made paintings and designed stained glass. Chagall is usually associated with images of people and animals flying. His narrative paintings are executed in a faux naïf style, with soft colours, and have a sentimental quality. He often painted images of love and marriage, for example a painting shows a bride and groom resting on a giant chicken in the sky, with symbolic objects of the artists Jewish faith in the background. As well as the chicken and the rooster Chagall like to paint horses, usually white with large green eyes and long eyelashes, again often in the sky. 
Chagall was commissioned to design the stained glass windows for a chapel designed by le Corbusier in the south of France.
!Chakur Bhupen.
Indian artist born around 1930, died 2003, one of the few Indian contemporary painters to become well known outside India. Chakur's figurative paintings depicted his life often intimately, and included sexual acts with male partners. But in the main Chakur showed India in a contemporary way unhampered by the history of Indian art but at the same time making it a part of his work, which shows a particular the influence of Indian miniatures.
!Chalkley Brian Dawn.
British artist born 1950s, Chalkley works as both a man and a woman as he is a cross dresser. Sometimes his work is authored by both Brian and Dawn. He uses video and photography to investigate identity. For example a film in which Dawn is seen in various dangerous scenarios, alone in isolated places having possibly been attacked. 
!Chamberlain John.
working in the 1960s US artist Chamberlain made sculpture from compressed dumped cars which he either retrieved from the compressing dump or took to be compressed. The resulting cubes were exhibited as sculpture. He sometimes extracted compressed parts of cars and combined them to make sculptures. The Spanish artist Angela de la Cruz's trashed canvases can be considered in relation to Chamberlains work.
!Chapman Jake and Dinos.
British artists born in mid 1960s the Chapman's are brothers who work together. They became known in 1993 for Disasters of War, a sculpture that recreated Goya's disasters of way as a 1:100 scale model. This grisly scene was presented on plinth the size of a table top, realistically made and leaving nothing to the imagination. Flayed corpses hang from trees, severed limbs are strewn about, headless torsos are propped up, heads stuck on bayonets. They later made a series of etchings based on this work in homage to the original.
Another early work was Little Death Machine, a working machine built on model scale in a vitrine on a plinth that presented a rubber model of a brain that functioned as a pump to spurt out white liquid. 
On one had the Chapman's work is deeply rooted in art history, politics and subversion with implied criticism of Western capitalism and of the failure of art to deal with important issues. On the other hand the artists delight in the puerile, in a childish humour and set out to deliberately and defiantly shock. 
It is the Chapman's life size sculptures of mutant children that are most notorious in this regard. These children, which have the appearance of shop window mannequins made in what has become their main medium of cast fibreglass and realistically airbrush painted, have genitalia on their face and smooth skin where their genitals should be. A girl might have a vagina as a mouth, or several orifices on her body where none would usually be. a boy may have a penis as a nose. The children are posed in apparently compromising positions and situated in a beautiful garden built of model material. There are trees and plants with large fantasy flowers and grass made from a material that resembles a scaled up version of the green sand-like material used as grass by model makers and model railway enthusiasts. The children appear to be frolicking in a strange Eden. The Chapman's have in this work as in all their work taken a basic human urge, such as the urge to kill, the sexual urge and its many perversions, and urge to power and represented it in order to confront their viewer with the possibility of discovering such urges in themselves. In this sense their work is highly politicised, but their use of shock tactics sometimes works against them. 
The life-size mutant children are in fact a scaled up version of a 1:100 scale model, and led the artist also to recreate details from the disasters of War as life size work. On this scale the latter seems less shocking. The Chapman's made a porn film featuring people with these same prosthetics genitalia attached to their bodies.
The Chapman's continue to make etchings and other works on paper, and to make large scale installations and models. Their McDonald's Concentration camp 2000 is a very large 1:50 model of a fictitious concentration camp no doubt based on a real one, which has McDonalds logos. The camp processes people, we see the tiny figures begin brought in, living in squalor, being killed and 'processed' in various ways. Much of what the model depicts is familiar to us not through experience but through fictitious depiction on film and television and the model relies on this to animate it. The work makes the daring if literal analogy between a fast food company bringing cheap food to the masses with famously no concern for their detrimental and social impact and the Nazis. The have also made larger scale sculpture again in their usual medium of cast fibreglass, realistically painted with an airbrush, which represents a kind of gothic heavy metal concentration camp monument with massed skulls, very black and dark.
The Chapman's most recent work is a darkened room full of apparent African tribal art, carvings in wood which are painted and have added grass, beads and teeth. The room seems to be in a museum, darkened to preserve vulnerable and light sensitive materials, which lends a familiar reverence to the sculptures set on plinths. There is a deadened acoustic. On closer inspection the viewer can see that the carvings all in some way feature the MacDonald's logo, the golden M, or represent a burger or Ronald McDonald the company's clown mascot. These are cleverly worked as 'African' looking sculpture, Ronald McDonald a totemic figure, the burger often the mouth of a figure, the M appearing as a decorative element. The ironic pairing of the colonial collection with the symbol of capitalism.

!!Realism.
!Chardin.
Sixteenth century painter of still lives, usually flowers and vegetables.
!Chavannes Puvis de.
French painter of the early nineteenth century who painted a young man dark hair and eyes standing in a small boat on a lake. 
!Chetwynd, Lali.
Artist working in London, Chetwynd has made several performance works in the late 1900s and early 2000s.
!Cheung Lisa.
Korean artist born in the 1970s who makes photographic works often shown as slide projections.
!Chicago Judy.
American artist Chicago born 1950s changed her name from the patronymic to that of her birthplace as a feminist gesture in the 1970s. Chicago's work 'The Dinner Party' 1972 became a iconic feminist work. It is a narrow table arranged in a triangular format, with place settings for all the famous and unsung heroines of American life, for example Mrs Lincoln. The place settings are actually embroideries depicting plates and each one is made by a different woman artist. Similar to the way women make church kneelers. Chicago wanted to draw attention to the under representation of women's achievement by staging this imaginary dinner party of these great women, and to use traditionally female but culturally undervalued materials and methods to make it. She brought the women together my means of the dinner table because this is the means by which women had traditionally brought people together. The work came to be seen as representative of the struggle for recognition of women artists as well as in other areas of life of the time, and was influential for several succeeding generations of artists. 
!Child Andrew.
British artist born in the 1960s.
!Childish Billy.
British artist, poet and musician born around 1960. Childish has made a large number of naïve figurative paintings often of himself and his friends on found wooden boards, the sides of boxes, and other unconventional material. He is known equally for his poetry which is written with and makes a virtue of his dyslexic spelling, and the punk band which he fronts, Thee Headcoats. Working in this way since the early 1980s, Childish achieved notoriety beyond his cult following in the late 1990s when he was immortalised by ex-girlfriend Tracy Emin in several works, including her embroidered tent 'Everybody I Have Ever Slept With'. Since then Childish formed the Stuckists, a self proclaimed movement that promotes the idea that British art in particular the work of the artists that make up so called Brit Art, is simply 'stuck'. The Stuckists set out to critique it, by means of pamphleteering, demonstrating, fly postering and other public protestations and interventions. 
!Chillida Eduardo.
Mexican Sculptor born in the 1930s who made monumental steel sculptures usually site specific, often in natural environment. For example one of his characteristic M or comb like structures is placed on a cliff top to rust and acquire its orange red colour. 
!Chilvers John.
Born in the 1960s the British painter Chilver has made paint itself the subject of his conceptual paintings. He uses paint squeezed or piped in the way icing would be to decorate a cake, through a Square nozzle, to produce a three dimensional line on the canvas. He adds paint from a traditional round nozzle. The paintings depict simple scenes, for example a fence with a bird on it. Or a style with a clump of grass. The fence or style will be piped in square lines often black or dark grey, the bird in many colours of thinner round lines, the whole giving the impression of casualness and speed of execution when in fact the reverse is obviously the case. Chilver often uses puns in his title, for example style for both the object and the other meaning. He investigates the nature of painting the painted mark, without actually painting at all since the backgrounds are entirely flat and the paint never touched by a brush or worked at all. 
!Chodzko Adam.
British artist born 1960s. Looking for Jesus a work made in the 1990s. Chodszko placed a classified advertisement requesting people who look like to send him passport photos. Often they bore no resemblance at all. Chodsko made a work with Afghan refugees living in Hastings in 1990 in which he asked them to sort through and select from the archive of Cubitt, an artist run organisation in London. The selection was placed in a watertight box and buried below the high water mark on the beach at Hastings. Another work from 2003 was site specific, Chodzko placed a billboard in a field in Texas on which was printed the directions to a billboard at Cubitt in London, outside which was a billboard with the direction to the billboard in Texas. A kind of transatlantic endgame with the idea of encouraging a sense of place, geography, time and space. A photo of the US billboard displayed at site of UK one and vice versa.
Chodzkho's work usually socially engaged and often involving research, correspondence or mass participation.
!Christo and jean Claude.
Beginning in the 1970s French artist Christo and his partner Jean Claude began wrapping objects, to transform one thing to another, solidify forms, change a hard form to an apparently soft one, graduating to larger and larger objects. They began to work with fabric on a large scale, either wrapping buildings or the landscape. They used parachute silk, vinyl and other kinds of industrial fabric with the required properties. Several works exemplify what they do best. For example, valley curtain, made in the early 80s, a large orange curtain was hung across a valley somewhere in US probably. California. Running fence is a mile long fence of red fabric that follows the contours of a hill. A large number of table umbrellas were installed dotted over a hillside. The island skirts surround a number of minute islands, following the shoreline and floating on the water for 30 metres or so. As with all their work, the proportions of the intervention always take the view from a distance into account, since the work by its nature temporary finally only exists as a documentary photograph it is therefore made with this photograph in mind. Thus the island skirts were designed to be wide enough to be clearly visible in an aerial photograph. And the locations are very carefully chosen with the final photograph in mind. In the 1990s Christo and jean Claude completed their most ambitious projects, the wrapped Reichstag and the wrapped Pont Neuf. These structures were wrapped in a fabric that was light enough to fold and gather round the forms they covered, and bound with rope. the Pont Neuf was wrapped in a gold fabric. The resulting transformation was a triumph of planning, negotiation, construction, and there are still postcards of the work on every Parisian postcard rack
!Clarke Roger.
British artist born in 1960s who made large scale sculptures during the 1990s often site specific, from perforated lacquered steel, folded into clean geometric shapes.
!Clemente Francisco.
Italian American painter born in the late 1940s who was extremely successful in the 1980s. Clemente makes figurative painting and works on paper, as well as small scale sculpture and ceramics. His work shows his interest in Indian art in its colours and in its often spiritual themes. Clememte's main subject is the male body.
!Close Chuck photo realist.
US artist who began working in the 1960s. Close initially made photo-realist paintings but he is best know for his gridded painting. Inspired by the printing process and the way an image is broken down into dots of three colours, Close developed a way of placing a grid of squares of about 3 x 3 cm over the image he wanted to paint. Very often this would be a self portrait. He then produced the image by painting each square a different colour so that from a distance the image would be readable but close to the coloured squares would be predominate. In doing so he was investigating  both the effect of printing and painting, making a work that looked photographic, as painting had been trying to do, but that was neither painting in the most obvious sense or photograph. This was after all another way of doing what painting has often been concerned with, namely applying colours in such a way that an image is effective from a distance which inevitably means that it wont be so close up. All this work was made before the digital revolution; after this Close's paintings look like exactly like pixels. As well as paintings, Close also worked on paper in watercolours. He made a series of self-portraits using blacks and greys that emulate black and white photos. 
!Collins Anne.
US artist who makes photographs, for example of women in urban and rural landscapes, with a precisely controlled banality. 
!Collins Cecil.
visionary painter
!Collins Hannah.
Collins Susan
UK artist who pioneered the use of holograms in art in the early 1980s, Collins has contoured to be a the forefront of technological innovation in visual art. Recently she has been working with sound and with the internet.
!Collishaw Matt.
British artist born in the 1960s who made a large format photographs of a bullet entrance hole in a persons scalp. 
!Condo George. 
American artist born around 1960 who makes paintings that use art historical references, often nearly remaking a particular work but with Condos often fantastic twists and distortions so as to create an entirely contemporary version of a painting from history. The paintings use a variety of styles and usually bright colours, and although they have a clearly historical reference they often have a science fiction/fantasy reference too, sometimes they contain absurd elements. Condo also paints LP covers, turning them into large paintings around a metre high.
!Constable John.
An eighteenth century English artist who painted one of the most famous paintings of the English countryside, The Haywain. This shows a country scene in which a cart loaded with hay is travelling down a lane. The cart is very small in relation to the picture as whole as are the farm workers that are shown. The painting consists mostly of trees and bushes, thus is full of green browns and ochres. It is a peaceful image of a beautiful summers day with the harvest being brought in. Flatford Mill is another almost as well known painting, showing a house on a millpond by a river. Again trees and vegetation predominate with a strong sense of human presence sublimated to the landscape. A sense of the weather is in these paintings too. They seem to represent and idealised version of the countryside in the past that people value. 
Constable always used something red in his paintings, a tiny element of red that served to draw the eye in to the part of the painting that he wanted the viewer to e directed to. It might be the roof of a distant cottage or as in the Haywain, a red garment on a person on the cart. 
!Cooke Beryl.
British artist born in the 1940s, usually termed 'naïve' who paints women, usually rather large both in size and in personality, going about their daily life. The paintings are humorous and have a strong narrative. They are simple in their appeal and quite close to illustration. Cooke is extremely well known in Britain.
!Coplans John.
British artist born in the 1950s who makes black and white photographs of his own naked body and parts of his body. Coplans has exhaustively documented his aging body, which is a more or less average male body, including his genitalia, in detailed close up. The texture of his skin, the hairs, the wrinkles, nothing is left to the imagination. Coplans seems to be presenting the male body as it is as a counter to the over exposed female body. His presentation of the male body reveals its frailty, and significantly it is an entirely unsexualised presentation. 
!Corcia Lorca Philiipe de.
Photographer who takes images of the everyday and shows them in groups.
!Corot.
French nineteenth century painter known for his still calm scenes of the French countryside, often roads and tracks feature in his landscapes, and always trees, which he was particularly good at painting. Corot painted some notable snow scenes. The paintings are small, no more than 60 cm high.
!Counsel Melanie.
British artist born around 1960.
!Courbet Gustav.
French painter known as the first realist painter. Courbet painted the French landscape.
!Coventry Keith.
British artist born in 1960s who paints white on white paintings that reproduce famous paintings in oil paint without colour.
!Cox Stephen.
British artist born in the 1950s who made some carved stone tondos with classical imagery and inscriptions in the 1980s.
!Craig Martin Michael.
British American artist born in the 1940s who makes wall paintings depicted much larger than life ordinary objects - furniture, paperclips, tools, bicycles, lamps, globes, fittings, juxtaposed without reference to relative scale, at various angles. The objects are placed on a very brightly coloured ground painted with matt emulsion paint and outlined in black plastic tape, except for a period in the 1980s when Craig Martin used square sectioned steel rods bent to shape and welded to create the outlines. The wall paintings may fill a whole gallery or museum, or just one wall. 
Craig Martins earlier work made in the 1960s and 70s is conceptual. His best known work is the Oak Tree, which consists of a glass of water placed on a glass shelf above the viewers head and an accompanying framed text which explains to the viewer why the glass of water is an oak tree, by means of a question and answer between the artist and a fictitious interlocutor. The artist claims that it is by the authority invested in him as an artist that the glass of water is an oak tree, thus this is a work about authorship and subjectivity. He also made a work with a row of clipboards and plumb lines hung on a wall, a series of boxes with hinged lids placed on the floor, the lids taking progressively larger parts of the box until the lid was more box and the box more lid.
!Cranach.
German medieval artist working in the 1300s who painted an altarpiece that was shocking for the time since it accurately depicted the misery suffered by Christ on the cross, the pain and the physical degradation. Cranach also showed the plight of ordinary people of the  time by painting them with festering sores, deformities and other afflictions. He painted very realistically in quite bright colours. 
!Crash.
a group consisting of an writer and an ex graphic designer called Scott King who produced a magazine called Crash! Was produced in the mid 1990s and was notable for its mix of comment about art music advertising and consumer culture, and its political stance which was anti-capitalist, presented in a humorous and irreverent but highly intelligent way. Crash!'s poster of Cher the pop singer dressed as Che Guevara the revolutionary, pristine in black and right in the graphic style adopted by Marxist revolutionary movements, was widely successful. 
!Creed Martin.
Scottish artist born around 1960 who makes sculpture and installation from almost nothing. All his work is assigned a number and a description for the title, For example, Work No.XX: A door opening and shutting, Work No.XX: The lights going on and off, Work No. XX: One A4 sheet of paper screwed into a ball. Further works include a cube made of layers of elastoplast, a cube made of layers of masking tape cubes, a bulging protrusion from the wall of a room which is plastered and painted to be as part of the wall. 
The work is sometimes active, for example A work which consists of a room full of white balloons through which the viewer must push references Yves Klein's 'Void', and empty gallery space. The door that opens and shuts is operated by a door closer on a timed switch. The lights going on and off is similar (this work has also been 'performed' by creeds band Owada - whenever the lights came on the band played, whenever they went off the band stopped, as if the electricity supply for the amplifiers were linked to the lights. Or the other way around. Owada which can be described as making minimal conceptual music gained success as an art band in the late 90s and early 2000s with tracks such as One to A Hundred, which featured Creed speaking these numbers in order and the band playing rising scales one note per number. 
!Crewsdon Gregory.
American artist who makes photographs of staged events that appear to be potential crimes scenes, places where a crime might happen. There is something of the supernatural about the images, they have an unreality due to the highly controlled lighting and decisions made in the printing. A small town petrol station may be seen from above at night for example and the disposition of people and vehicles might seem strangely static, leading the viewer to guess at possibilities, perhaps to wonder whether there has been or is about to be an alien invasion. Another work might show a person looking at the sky, presaging some unknown possibly extra terrestrial event. The photographs are complex and ambitious in their construction of a subtly warped reality shot on location rather than in a studio. 
!Cross Dorothy.
Irish artist born in the mid twentieth century who make work from leather and fabric, a kind of feminist surrealism, for example a corset made from leather tanned from cows udders with the udders sticking out.
!Crotty Russell.
American artist born around 1960 who makes obsessive biro drawings sometimes on large sheets of paper, also in very large books, at least 80 cm high. The drawings are made by colouring in with blue biro, using the pen fro the purpose fro which it is least suited, on a scale which is plainly absurd. 
!Cruz Juan.
British artist born in the mid 1960s who works with sound and text. Cruz made an installation performance in which he translated the text of Cervantes great Spanish novel Don Quixote in real time over a number of days. He also made a work based on the Duende, an untranslatable Spanish word that describes the 'feeling' needed to perform flamenco. Cruz is chiefly interested in language and translation.
!Cucci Enzo.
Italian artist who made large scale drawings of classical nudes using an obsessive cross hatched style for which he became very well known in the 1980s. 
!Cullen Shane.
Northern Irish artist who made a large scale text installation for which he printed or stencilled or used transfer lettering to inscribe the letters written to him during a correspondence he had with political prisoners on remand in the H block, the notorious prison in Northern Ireland. These covered the walls of the exhibition space. 
!Cumberland Stewart.
British painter born in the 1970s
!Currin John.
American painter born in 1962 who became extremely successful in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Currin made his name by painting women with unfeasibly enormous breasts. The paintings are made in a mixture of kitsch and old master style. The women have exaggerated cartoon like features yet the colours used are entirely realistic. The women seem to be there to hold the male gaze and fulfil male desire but they are often painted in pairs, absorbed with each, ignoring the viewer. Currin also painted portraits of real people, still lives and interiors. His knowing and slightly anarchic use of virtuoso painting techniques and undeniable skill in painting and drawing allied with subject matter that would have been entirely unacceptable in the 1980s or early 90s brought him to attention. 
!Cyril Griffiths Brian.
British artist who has made a number of installations from cardboard, discarded materials, empty plastic containers and any number of banal materials. Griffiths space ship command module control panel made in 1997 was an adult sized version of a child's dream. Griffiths has made many objects that seem like things that the viewer thinks they could make themselves but the scale of them makes them much more than this. A world in which everything can be made from anything is created.
!Da Messina Antonello.
Italian renaissance painter who made a painting of Saint Jerome in his study showing the room as a construction that sits on its own in a landscape, giving us access through the open front wall. Perhaps what we are seeing is monks cell, consisting of two rooms linked made of dark coloured wood in one of which the saint is seated at a desk. 
!Da Vinci Leonardo.
Quintessential Italian renaissance artist, Da Vinci is often referred to as Renaissance Ma. Meaning that he defined the era. He worked as a court artist for the Medici family in Venice. The artist is perhaps the most famous in the world, or has certainly made the most famous painting the Mona Lisa, which has been reproduced by the billion, forged and stolen many times and still draws huge crowds to its site on the walls of the Louver museum in Paris. This painting depicts a woman shown head and shoulders turned very slightly to one side. She has on a simple yellowish gold dress a plain necklace and has brown hair. She does not look particularly wealthy. There is a landscape in the background. There is an inscription LHOQ below her on a painted scroll. 
What made the painting so famous is the woman's expression, in particular her smile. She seems to be looking straight at the viewer, and has a look of cool calm appraisal, the hint of a smile on her lips. However her eyes seem to be fixed on the viewer wherever they stand in relation the painting, leading to the myth that the painting is actually following the movements of her viewers, that she is somehow real. This is an extraordinary achievement for a painting which has come to symbolise great beauty. The term Mona Lisa has almost become an adjective to describe a beautiful woman
The myth attached to the painting has led to many copies being made and to the work featuring in other artists work, in advertising, in newspaper cartoons, in fact it is an image that has currency everywhere in the Western World and often beyond. Mona Lisa copies appear in fairgrounds with holes cut for heads so that people can be photographed as her. Automatic photo booths have the Mona Lisa as a backdrop or as a body for the sitters head shot. Copies of her with the eyes cut out have been used in films for comedic effect - someone behind the painting will look through the eye hole so that it appears that she is following a person around the room and Marcel Duchamp famously graffitied a moustache onto a reproduction of her.
The author of this image succeeded in painting a very beautiful portrait, but it is only one of his achievements. He made many religious paintings and altarpieces. A cartoon for a Madonna and child is particularly well known. He did a vast number of drawings from the models, paying endless attention to hands and feet, eyes or other parts of the body, drawing them separately to get them right. 
Da Vinci was a polymath and his interests extended to anatomy and engineering. He performed many dissections and recorded what he saw in drawings, expanding his sense of how to draw the human form this way as well as his medical knowledge of how the human body worked. Notoriously he drew a foetus still inside a woman's uterus.
Da Vinci's other famous work is a drawing of the golden section. A male figure is drawn standing with both arms stretched out horizontally, and one leg pointed outwards at an angle. The man has flowing hair. The ink is brown and the paper cream probably the effects of age on the drawing. Measured lines radiate form the figure, which represents the proportions taken from the human body used to make perspective and on which architectural construction is based. A copy of this drawing was placed on the Moon by the crew of the Apollo in the 1960s.
Da Vinci was also an inventor. He was interested in the myth of Icarus and built a flying machine.
!Dali Salvador.
Spanish, born in 1900 perhaps the most famous of the surrealist and a candidate to be the best known artist in the world, Dali's paintings are instantly recognisable, indeed details of his paintings. Melted clocks are instantly associated with Dali even though they are only part of one of his paintings. Dali's surrealism is fantastical. He created dreamlike landscapes filled with distorted objects, nightmarish scenes and apocalyptic wastelands and religious iconography. One painting shows mutant human bones that seem to have a life of their own in a grey green no-mans land, the aftermath of a war. Another shows the crucifixion from Christ's point of view, showing what he would have seen looking down from the cross, the whole a luridly coloured hallucination. A landscape with dead trees has clock faces draped on the trees and on the ground apparently melting and dripping. A giant red rose floats in the air above a desert. Lobster telephone. Dali's use of obvious symbolism and his lurid hallucinatory images have made him enduringly popular. 
His personal eccentricity has only increased his popularity and is difficult to separate from his work. Dali dressed as a dandy, often wearing white, and sporting a very long waxed moustache that extended beyond his face and pointed up. He lived with his wife Galia in a house in Spain at Figuera da Foz where the couple were host to many of their contemporaries.
!Dalwood Dexter.
!Dalwood Hubert.
British sculptor born in early 1930s died in the 1970s. Dalwood made carved, cast and constructed sculptures from stone, bronze, acrylic resin, acrylic sheet and metal. He also made a few paintings. His early works were totemic stone objects that owed something to Jacob Epstein. He began to make table top subcultures that were a bit like mini abstract sculpture gardens, cast in aluminium or bronze. He used tubular or square forms and wavy lines placed on a rectangular base that would be cast in one piece. He made sculptures from Plexiglas with metal wire threaded through. 
As he became successful Dalwood began to be commissioned and he made a number of public works, for example a construction in a park made from brushed steel tubes of a large diameter fixed vertically to the ground in a cluster, reaching about 5 metres in height, curving around at the top like giant geometric plant stalks. Or an egg shaped bronze sculpture about one and a half metres in length lying on its side with some detail on its surface.
!Dan Flavin.
American artist who worked form the 1960s to the 1980s. Flavin's material was the fluorescent lighting tube. He made very simple and considered sculptures by combining various coloured tubes in different ways and placing them on the wall, leaning the against the wall, or placing them on the floor. One work uses multiple bluish white tubes placed on the wall to form a crucifix shape. The intense cold light produced seems to describe a place beyond the earth. In another he leaned several tubes of different colours against the wall. The cables of the tubes are visible and form part of the work. Flavin thought of the works in the same way that a painter might - using light and colour to depict an atmosphere.
!Dant Adam.
British artist born in the 1970s who makes wry satirical cartoon style drawings about art, artists, and the art world. Dant's project is serious and comprehensive in its ambition to comment upon everything that happens but to make sure that art doesn't take itself too seriously. He began by making a weekly self published pamphlet, much in the vein of 18th century pamphleteers soapbox speakers. The pamphlet was had drawn and written by a pseudonymous character invented by Dant to represent himself (who was often shown in the drawings). It was a bit like a diary and featured topical news about art and advice written in mock serious style. It was photocopied and folded into a pocket sized booklet which Dant himself distributed wherever he went free of charge. He did this every week for several years, and it was the long term nature of the project that made it successful. Dant constructed a portable booth from which to distribute the pamphlet and became a presence at art fairs and museum exhibitions. By a simple weekly action Dant produced a major work.  
!Darboeven Hannah.
Artist working in the 1960s and 70s who made works using text. Darboeven was interested in catalogues, indexes and diaries. One work for example took hundreds of index cards on which the artist had written and displayed them carefully categorised. The text on the cards however consisted only of 'x's. This display of an organising system which contained no information served to make visual a practise which is in use in daily life but which in never actually seen and rarely considered. Darboeven's obsessive writing projects are always made by hand.
!Daumier Honore.
French artist 
!Davenport Ian.
British artist born in the 1960s who began to make the drip paintings for which he became known in the 1990s. Davenport poured liquid paint onto a canvas from the top, allowing gravity to take the drip to the bottom of the canvas in a perfectly vertical line. He continued in this way across the width of the canvas using different colours until he had achieved a striped painting made without a single brushstroke, or any touch of the artists hand. At first sight the stripes would appear to have been painted with a brush perhaps even using masking tape, but on closer inspection tiny irregularities in the pour and the quality of the edge of the stripes made it obvious how the painting was made. Sometimes the paintings were in sombre colours, others were rainbow striped. Later Davenport developed various ways of making the pouring easier (fixing the paint pot to a runner for example) and he was able to make bigger canvases and even to pour directly onto a wall.
Davenport also made paintings by pouring a coating of one colour of paint onto a canvas placed horizontally, and then adding in a stripe, a line, and arc in a contrasting colour by pouring directly into the wet surface. The two colours when dry formed a perfect flat shiny surface, in the way that the technique of enamelling can be used to combine colours. 
!Davey Grenville.
British artist born around 1960 who made very large cast and lacquered fibreglass sculptures in the 1980s and early 90s. Davey created abstract forms that had a functionality about them, like giant lids, plugs or covers, often round, sometimes pairs that seemed that they might fit together. These were made from technical drawings, perfectly constructed and painted in shiny cream, grey, or white. The sculptures were placed on the gallery floor, often on their curved sides rather than on any flat plane they may have had. 
!David Enrico.
British Italian artist born in early 1960s who made a series of very large embroideries mounted on stretchers in the late 1990s. These were taken from collages and drawings he made from fashion magazines depicting women in fetish wear, extremely stylised clothes, very exaggerated bodies, very high heels, masks, drawn in a geometric style often with a 1920s or 30s feel. Although the images were of women they depict a non-specific sexuality, the women often have large masculine bodies and may seem more like cross dressed men. David used woollen thread to fill in the figures with satin stitch, and due to the scale of the image often 2 metres high or more, the stitches sometimes needed to be over a metre in length. Sometimes the stitches represented rays of light, too, or in one case silver thread was used on a blue canvas to represent the tight binding on the body of a model.
David used anything from fashion, craft and design that he likes to create these creatures. One had a butterfly entirely concealing her face, like a mask. Another is like an African queen. They are decadent often sinful and sexual images, their materials (those of handcraft) at odds with the subject matter. He also made items of furniture and lamps. He continued to make collages and began to work on some photo collages in 2000 using photos of himself wearing coloured paper constructions - red and blue, black and white, something like the costumes designed by the dada artists for cabaret Voltaire. Other collages used images from magazines and often the background paper was cut in a certain way so that the found image could be raise from the background. He used brooches and other found jewellery and began to use carpentry, furniture making and decorative arts materials.
In 2000 David began to draw men, (although it was not really the case that he had been thinking of the characters in his previous work as women). A man in a top hat and a morning suit, some kind of dandy, appeared in his drawing. A man in evening dress appears before the closed curtain of a theatre in a drawing in back and white that looks very much like a woodcut. A sculpture of a male figure is made of plywood coloured with wood stain; the profile of the figure is cut twice from sheets of ply and slotted together at right angles to each other. Turned wooden knobs are added to represent testicles. 
A large rag doll three metres high is made of canvas, stuffed, and embroidered with facial and bodily features and decorative patterns, and presented sagged against a plywood cabinet and lying on the floor. A gallery door is replaced by an etched glass and metal door that has an art nouveau style. A very long plywood screen covers the length of a gallery wall, on it a repeating interlinked pattern of a stylised male figure that has a 30s look is made by incising the wood and using wood stain to create a kind of faux marquetry.  A giant leather medal hangs on the wall. 
David was briefly a member of Donatella a group of artists and musicians who produced music videos and cds, and made work in collaboration with fashion designers Eley Kishimoto for catwalk shows. 
!David Jacques Louis.
French sixteenth century painter who made one of the first topical political paintings ever, the Death of Marat in ???. This showed Marat, dead in his bath by his own hand, the knife with which he had stab influences bed himself on the floor near to his hand. His arm trails over the side of the bath which is of stone, as if carved from a single block on a pedestal base, he wears a white cloth wound like a turban around his head which lolls on the side of the bath. In his other hand he clutches a book or a letter. His skin is looks cold and blue. The date is inscribed the corner of the painting. David was one of the first artist to paint topical subjects. Relation to Delacroix?
!Davies Peter.
British artist born around 1970 who began his career making paintings consisting of many coloured dots on a white ground on huge 3 or 4 meter wide canvases, creating patterns of waves, like an abstract pointillism. Davies always uses acrylic paint applied as flat solid colour. He went on to make text paintings in the later 1990s. For example The Hot 100 is a numbered list drawn up as a table in two columns with the lines painted in white, of the artists personal hundred favourite artists, painted in white on a multicoloured ground, a different colour for each line of text. The list functions as an illustration of subjectivity presented as a formally considered abstract painting. Davies subsequently made a diagram painting describing 20th century art in terms of interlinked artists and movements. The text is painted in white on coloured elliptical or circular shapes to fit each name or title, which are linked or cross linked by coloured lines, the whole on a white background.
Davies then began to make a series of very large pattern paintings at least 4 meters wide. The paintings are abstract three dimensional pattern that cover the picture plane and create a surface pattern, some painted in bright colours, some in monochrome, a bit like geometric doodles that play with simple perspective and convex and concave illusion. Like the text paintings these are painted in flat acrylic paint, with hard edges to the colours painted by hand rather than masked. Some of them allude vaguely to Robert Delaunay's paintings and to thirties textile patterns, others to futuristic cityscapes. 
!Davis Peter.
British artist
!Dawson Verne|.
American artist whose paintings show an apparent utopia, a kind of modern pastoral world, with tiny people on the scale of the people in a Bosch painting populating woodland scenes. 
!De Chirico Giorgio.
Italian artist who painted views of towns and architecture, which are very distinctive for their depopulation, strange atmosphere and strong light. In a painting of an empty town square, there is a statue, a tower and a row of arches, a kind of arcade. The shadows cast by buildings and statue and under the arcade are black. The ground is ochre. Another painting has a the fallen head of a classical marble statue, very like Michelangelo's David, seen lying on its side on the ground, with a broken off hand in the background. 
!De Cosimo Piero.
!De Hooch Pieter. 
Seventeenth century Dutch artist who painted domestic interiors. De Hooch painted the life of the Amsterdam merchant class in intimate detail. He was painting at a time when this newly wealthy class wanted to display its wealth to the world, but women were still largely confined to the home. So windows were always open, light streaming in to spaces otherwise candlelit, food was plentiful, fruit a luxury. Paintings portrayed a range of subjects. One shows a toddling child reaching up to the mound of apples on a woman's lap. The woman is sitting on a stool and there is a door leading into a room with a window in it behind her. The floor is stone flagged. The child is rosy cheeked and blonde. Another shows a back yard with red bricks laid and plants growing along a wall. De Hooch favours women at home. He also painted landscapes. 
!De Keersmacker Anna Teresa.
Dutch artist
!De Kooning Walter.
a Dutch painter working in the US, he painting bright and gestural large abstract expressionist paintings with figurative elements. Like Rothko he did not subscribe to the notion of the artist as knowing subject but to the Kantian idea of pure art. Enjoyed great success but struck down by Alzheimer's. Continued to paint and a museum exhibition in the late 90s showed his post Alzheimer's work to greatly controversial reaction. Many claimed that he was still a genius, many that the work could now only be compared to 'outsider art' and the art of the insane. Vilified by us artist Paul McCarthy in a film in which McCarthy appears dressed as a paint tube, squirting paint every where and chanting de kooning De Kooning in an infantile way.
!de Kooning Willem.
American artist who worked from the 1950s to the 1990s making paintings in a great variety of styles from figurative to abstract. He is best known for two periods of his work, the first in the 50s is a series of small portraits often of women grinning with lots of teeth, painted in an almost impossibly thick and encrusted impasto, the surface of the canvas heavy with blobs of paint that project from its surface, in browns, blacks, reds and yellows. The second period is de Koonings controversial late paintings, made after the artist was diagnosed as suffering from Alzheimer's disease. These are very large paintings, thin bright primary colours of paint are applied in single brush strokes but the white primed surface of the canvas is barely covered, giving the impression of a white painting roughly covered in gestural marks. These paintings were highly controversial. Some considered them to be an extraordinary later flowering, other to be inconsequential in de Kooning's oeuvre due to his mental state and to be more akin to so called outsider art. Married to Elaine de Kooning.
!De la Cruz Angela.
British artist who make sculptures from collapsed and destroyed paintings. De la Cruz method is to construct a canvas which may be any size (from tiny to the largest which was a large scale installation of a canvas about fifteen metres squared). She paints the canvas in a plain colour, and then destroys it by breaking the stretcher and then twisting the whole into a heap. This is then fixed and either displayed on the wall or floor. These deceptively humble objects assume the presence of a sculptural object, thus a painting is transformed.
!de Monchaux Cathy.
British artist born in the 1960s who makes sculpture and installation. De Monchaux made a number of wall mounted works in the early 1990s from machined metal templates, bolted together with velvet, fur and leather often red or purple or black which was clamped between the metal but spilled out in carefully contrived folds. These constructions had a sexual fetishistic quality, they hinted at a purpose but remained ambiguous. They have a slightly gothic appearance but also a heavy metal aesthetic. Put simply they contrasted the supposedly masculine with the feminine, the functional with the luxurious to create decidedly feminine and visceral forms, which often alluded to the female body and genitalia in particular. De Monchaux continued to develop this way of working by expanding the scale of her sculptures, making repeating units and larger more complex forms, using a wider palette of coloured fabric and other materials, and sometimes making floor based installations. 
!De Rivera José.
!De St Phalle Niki.
French artist who makes large and small (ranging from table sized to outdoor public sculptures) papier mache and firbreglass sculptures of human and aniumal forms. These are somewhat like totem poles or other tribal art objects, beign mainly highly stylised white smoothed forms which are richly decorated with hand painting particluar on the head and limbs. 
!De Stael Nicholas.
Dutch painter
!De Stijl.
!Deacon Richard.
British artist Deacon began very large sculptures in the 1980s at a time when sculpture was at a zenith of popularity. Deacon and his contemporaries such as bill Woodrow, Grenville Davey etc. made abstract works largely from cheap easily available materials. Deacon used reclaimed wood which he cut into strips and ply and glued and bolted together to make large hollow snail shell like structures, which he later began to design on a computer. The nature of the materials belied the complexity of the shape and the effort required in their construction. The means of construction were very evident, for example glue spilled over from the joins where they had been compressed. What would usually be hidden or on the inside of such a large work, was actually the surface of the work. 
!Dean Tacita.
British artist born in 1960s who uses 35 mm film to make installations and simple projections. Lighthouse. Donald Crowhurst. Stormy ship blackboard drawings
!Debord Guy.
founder and leader of the Situatoinists, a Paris based group of international artists who were interested in Debords revolutionary ideas (and politics). Debord took Baudelaires idea of the Flaneur, the wanderer through a city and developed it into his personal concept fo the 'derive', a directed walk through urban scenery. Debord wanted to make the life of a city his subject and he believed that people should make themselves part fo the city. He was responsible through the poster printing intitiative he was part of, for many of the slogans familiar from the protests of striking workers in paris in May 1968, for example 'Under the Pavemnet is the Beach' and 'Beauty is in the streets'. Debord had various ideas including putting light switches on street lamps so that the people could turn them on and off at will. 
!Degas Edgar.
French painter working in the middle of the nineteenth century, Degas is known best for his scenes of ballet dancers rehearsing, which are instantly recognisable and much reproduced in particular as calendars. He mainly painted women, including several paintings and drawings of women bathing. Degas was very good at drawing as the many surviving works on paper in pencil and pastels testify. One of these shows the back of woman with red hair as she crouches in a tin bath. There is a blue towel next to her on the floor. Degas made many bronze sculptures of ballet dancers, most quite small around 50 cm high, as well as some of curled up dogs. His best known and very popular sculpture The Little Dancer is larger, around a metre high. The little girl is realistically modelled and wears a net tutu a bodice and ballet shoes. It is rare to find a bronze sculpture which has added clothes.
!Delacroix Eugene.
French painter of mid eighteenth century. Painting in France had up to this point depicted classical themes. Delacroix began to depict these in a realistic way, showing everyday details. His classical realism led him to develop a new way of painting and the way was opened for many to follow.  Before Delacroix no painter had tried to represent events of the present day. 
!Delaunay Robert.
French painter of the Cubist era who made semi-abstract paintings using lots of colours. He took the cubist planes and surfaces and used them to depict vague landscapes, introducing brighter and more luminous colours. Married to Sonia Delaunay.
!Delaunay Sonia.
French painter turn of the century and early 20th century, who made abstract pattern paintings, designed textiles and wallpaper and made clothes. She was unusual in that she regarded all her work as having the same importance. Delaunay's was known for her choice of glowing but subtle colours
!Della Francesca Piero .
Italian Siennese renaissance painter 1450s painted a number of notable frescos in churches in central Italy. In particular a virgin now significantly restored in a tiny village near Siena. A painting of the baptism of Christ hangs in the national gallery in London showing Christ being baptised by john the Baptist who is standing in a stream wearing a cloth round his loins. The Italian countryside stretches away in the background and can be explored for its convincing detail and perspective, standing in for the middle east.
!Deller Jeremy.
British artist born in the late 1960s who is interested in different social groups and how they are creative. The authorship of Deller's work is always in question (an essential part of Deller's work) - the creative work is as much the participants as it is Deller's, who acts as the facilitator of an idea. 
In the mid 1990s Deller began working with groups of people brought together by a particular shared passion. One of the first of these was his Manic Street Preachers project. Deller asked young fans of the band to write and draw their feelings about them and their music. The resulting document was collected into a book and is a testament to the power of music to represent the feelings and hopes of a generation. Deller subsequently drew a chart linking acid house music with brass band music via many other forms of popular music. The chart was hand drawn in white on black employing circles containing text linked and cross linked by arrows.
Acid Brass was a project in which Deller commissioned a brass band to play acid house music. The resulting hybrid was performed in concerts halls and galleries, and released as a CD. Deller's most ambitious work, Battle of Orgreave, was a full scale re-enactment of a battle fought between the police and striking miners at the peak of the miners strike in the early 1980s in Britain. The police charged the miners on horses. Deller arranged for several historical renactment societies to come together to stage a full scale renactment of this event. The battle and the filming of the battle was filmed by Mike Figgis a film director and intercut with original news footage. The resulting film was a very accurate portrayal of what happened that also revealed the lengths to which the governments went to ensure a media cover up of the brutality of the police and their determination that the scale of the protest should be played down. The Battle of Orgreave was shown on national television. Guest list was a work made for Imprint 93 an artist pamphlet series published my Matthew Higgs, which reproduced the guest list for an exhibition opening at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London. The list which featured a number of celebrities revealed a degree of social ambition and perhaps sycophancy on the part of the institution.
The Folk museum was made by Deller with Alan Kane. Together they collected hand made craft and folk objects of no intrinsic value and displayed them as if they were valuable collection of artefacts. 
At the Venice Biennale in Deller made button badges with a stop/end sign (red circle with diagonal line bisecting it on a white ground) and  the world Vogue on it. No Vogue referred to the magazine - Deller commented of the ubiquity of the magazines presence at any art event, and the ever increasing tendency of the art world to collide with the world of socialites and celebrities and be photographed doing so. Cardiff.
!Demand Thomas.
British artist who make photographs of complex paper 'sets' that he constructs himself. The sets replicate a real space, for example an office, which Demand then remakes entirely in card and paper. The resulting construction is carefully lit and then photographed in large format and presented as a very large (about 2 metres high) print. The image provokes a double take - it seems to be a plausible space although oddly empty. Once the viewer begins to try to decode the image, and look for clues, it becomes apparent that the surfaces of the furniture for example are too homogenous, there is no detail. Even then it is difficult to establish why the space depicted seems unreal. When the process behind the work become clear then the work can be viewed more an achievement in terms of its construction.
!Denes Agnes.
US artist who planted and cultivated a field of wheat in Manhattan on a 2 acre landfill site in 1982. Denes wanted to make a point about world trade, the economics of food production and famine. 
!Dieroff Xenia.
German artist living and working in Britain, Dieroff makes photographic work. A slide installation projected onto a hospital screen uses silhouetted figures and clever dissolves to create the illusion of a patient undressing that morphs into a striptease. 
!Dine Jim.
A contemporary of Rauschenberg and Johns in New York in the 60s and 70s, Dine best known work features his trademark hearts. Drawn in outline or painted often in red or pink on white.
Dion Mark
American artist who in interested in anthropology, material culture, ecology and natural history. His usually large scale multi part installations are the result of research projects into specific locations or subjects. For example in London he searched an area of the muddy Thames riverbank above and below the timeline with the painstaking care of an archaeological dig. The resulting 'artefacts' or trash was cleaned up and exhibited in a number of vitrines and display cases in the Tate Gallery. 
!Dix Otto.
Painted first world war atrocities in a very exaggerated way, including limbless and horrifically injured soldiers one with an eyeball hanging out, the best known being a drinking scene with two veterans sitting at a café table.
!Djistra Reineke.
a Dutch artist who became known in the late 1990s for her photographic portraits of young people. Like Thomas Struth and Thomas Ruff Djistra asked her subjects to look straight at the lens and not to smile. The resulting images are a true document of a generation. In 2000 she began to make video portraits. A film which portrays young people at a club shows them standing against a white backdrop, moving slightly. They are listening to music which the viewer cannot hear, but Djistra has asked them to stand still. Their body language reveals much about them as do their clothes. Although it is a film the participants have been captured in time as if it were a photographic portrait. Their youth is very expressive.
!Docherty Willie.
Northern Irish artist, Docherty made a number of photographic series and video works in the 80s and early 90s at the height of the troubles in Northern Ireland. These featured empty roads, empty landscapes, cars and checkpoints. A video work in his Turner prize nomination exhibition was filmed from a car driver point of view and purported to be a night drive with sinister intentions, although this merely suggested with the greatest economy of means. Docherty's work has an oneric quality although it deals with political issues. He give a glimpse of life on the border and of political strife in urban and rural landscapes.
!Doig Peter.
British painter who grew up in Canada born 1957. Doig is chiefly a landscape painter and was among those British artists who created a resurgence of interest in painting in Britain in the early 1990s. His landscapes are often oneric, usually populated by a single figure if at all and have a strong sense of the unknown and of adventure in them. Doig paints the seasons, the mountains, forests, lakes, vernacular architecture, and occasionally sports such as fishing, skiing, snowboarding. He paints thinly and loosely, scattering the surface with blobs of thicker paint when the image is complete which often serves to represent light for example the white blobs in an early work The Architects House. He painted a Corbusier housing block in a similar way, both are seen through trees and use a lot of green brown, back and white with touches of yellow white and red. Often the touches of paint on the surface do not read as part of the image but become very apparent on close inspection. They may even be bars of colour that are not part of the image at all, or splatters.
 Another early work the Bean Eater shows a boy walking in a field empty except for a red wooden house or barn. A leafless branch of a tree with some kind of seed or flower painted like glowing orangey white bobbles. Later works from 2000 onwards depict a steamboat apparently steaming past a jungle on a river reminiscent of (apocalypse). This is a very green painting, lush. a tree in the moonlight with a girl sitting on a branch high up, painted in greys and lilacs, as if it were a night scene or a nightmare. a lake with a canoe on it paddled by a man with long black hair and a beard, the canoe is orange and the lake very blue. This image is taken from an album cover. A painting of a mountain ski slope called Red ski jacket is very white with only the minute people bringing colour. One of a snow boarder shows the boy in the air upside down at the top of the canvas with a group of people watching at the bottom.
Doig became extremely influential in the mid 1990s. 
!Donachie Kay.
British artist who born in 1970s who made process painting during the 1990s, using a roller to transfer an image to a prepared canvas, resulting in an often haunting shadowy painting, the image always seeming slightly removed from reality due to the technique. Donachie often painted isolated houses, a tent, a Christmas tree, the interiors or Paul Klee's studio, somehow everything looks unpoplulated. She uses a monochrome palette, choosing a predominant colour for a painting. The transfer technique brings the concept of the photographic print into the painting although no such process is involved. The viewers uncertainty about how the image is made is paralelld by the uncertain status of the subject of the painting. Following this Donachie began to paint figures, for example groups of young women, and although not necessarily using the same technique, she gives the image the same once removed quality that places it in an uncertain time. Lighter colours but still monochrome begin to appear. The paintings are small, mostly under a metre squared.
!Donagh Rita.
British artist who makes geometric drawings.
!Donatello.
Italian renaissance or baroque sculptor, several sculptures of David and other classical characters in Florence.
!Donegan Cheryl.
US video artist of Irish extraction, Donegan's work investigates the sculptural and painterly possibilities of everyday activities. In Sunflower, she spins on grass with a bottle of yellow paint attached to her waist, it sprays out and slowly paints a circle. In Kiss My Royal Irish Ass she paints her buttocks green and sits on sheets of paper, three time on each to make a clover leaf painting. In another work she suggestively and lasciviously drinks milk that is spraying slowly from a hole made in the side of a plastic bottle and when her mouth is full she sprays the milk on the wall. In another she holds a French stick between her knees and eats it as far down as she can reach. In many ways Donegan's concerns bear comparison to the work of Sarah Lucas, with her interest in how the banal and the domestic can be both sexually suggestive and formally sculptural and humorous. Donegan also makes reference to abstract expressionism and to the ejaculatory possibilities that can be seen in the work of Jackson Pollock, and mocks the machismo inherent in his work with her own abject attempts. 
!Drummond Fiona.
British artist born 1962 who takes portrait photographs and still life often using flowers and referencing seventeenth century Dutch painting especially in terms of light, using studio set and lighting, also paints dogs and flowers. 
!Dubrofsky and Vinograd.
Russian painters born in the 1970s who paint collaboratively. Dubrofsky and Vinograd are among the few Russian artists to gain commercial success in the US and Europe. They are accomplished painters and draughtsmen, and their canvases allude to both history paintings and to Russian Socialist Realist art. They often ask other artists to paint part of the work for them and they may make several versions of the same painting or may make small version of sections of larger works, for example a book on a snowy muddy ground with a frog diving into a hole.
!Dubuffet Jan.
faux naïf, used sand to make paint rough textured, large simple figures and faces, graffiti African like.
!Duchamp Marcel.
Known as the father of conceptualism, the French artist Marcel Duchamp was among the artists escaping Europe either from censorship or persecution as Jews. He founded a movement called Dada, (a nonsense word with vague associations with children's language and the French fro hobby horse).  He became notorious for his controversial works usually sculptural particularly the ones that became known as ready-mades, most obviously Fountain, (title not this) exhibited at the Armoury show in New York in 1913. this was a gents ceramic urinal placed on its flat (wall mounting) side to resemble a Buddha like object, or fountain, signed R. Mutt (one of the invented punning names that Duchamp used to sign his work). This created a furore, and must be considered in the context of its contemporary art, largely post-impression and cubism. Duchamp's ready-mades were the first example of an artist taking a found object and either altering it or simply representing and titling it to make it into an art object. This simply but revolutionary act changed the parameters of what art could be for ever.
Other similar found object works are a bicycle saddle and handlebars put together to resemble a bulls head, a cycle wheel attached to the seat of a stool, a bottle dryer, 
Duchamp employed pseudonyms and puns as part of his work. His alter ego Rrose Selavy a pun on C'est la vie authenticated and signed many of his works including the urinal. He photographed himself dressed as Rrose (an unconvincing manifestation). She produced a perfume named La Belle Haleine a pun on La belle Helene, Helen of troy and an allusion in its literal translation good breath, to bad breath. 
Infra mince was a series of minimal works. Infra mince or infrathin was a concept involving the declaration of an invisible or intangible but banal act or action to be a work of art. For example the static friction of velvet trouser legs rubbing together, the warmth left on a recently vacated seat, 
Almost as notorious as the urinal was the reproduction of the Mona Lisa that Duchamp defaced. In a pun on the letters LHGC that appear below the face of the Mona Lisa he declared that 'elle a un grand cou' which translates as 'she has a fat arse' of thereabouts. He drew a moustache on her face. This re-appropriated image became one of the best known images in contemporary art. Duchamp took an icon of 16th century western art, defaced it and made his defaced version almost as famous. 
cast sexual parts. Duchamp made cast of the space around the female genitals, a negative of the genitals which produces a potential image of the real positive, and begin concave rather than convex, a kind of visual pun. These cast in bronze. 
origin du monde. One of Duchamp's last works was a large peepshow containing a wax female torso, laid on an apparent mossy bank, the head out of view, with the genitals exposed. This was a comment on a painting/drawing (by whom?) of same title. The apparently innocent tableau with its celebratory title became through the secret viewing through a peephole tainted with an atmosphere of sin and possible wrongdoing, even abuse or murder. 
The Large Glass, also known as The bride Stripped Bare by her Bachelors Even is a large sculpture comprising a screen print onto two pieces of glass held in a metal freestanding frame which was made in an edition. This work has more than any other 20th century work of art resisted interpretation. The images printed on the glass are some geometric rays, and lines, and a coffee grinder with 3 buckets, which was a motif Duchamp often used in other work and had made several drawings of. The buckets on the grinder are sometimes supposed to represent the bachelors, but in general the meaning of the work remains opaque.
Duchamp also made paintings several of the coffee grinder that appears in the Large Glass.
He was photographed by Man Ray with a star shaved out of the back of his close cut hair. Duchamp played chess every day of his life
!Dufy Raoul.
French painter date? of idyllic sea side scenes, using bright colours and a speedy under worked technique resulting in cheerful paintings which are extremely popular. Dufy commissioned to paint a mural for the head quarters of the national French electricity generating company celebrating electricity. This is a large panorama showing people going about all sorts of activities in the countryside, the city, at the sea side with electricity pylons lacing the scene together. The panorama is curved. It is now in the Musée Modern d'Arte de la Ville in Paris
!Dunham Carroll.
Abstract paintings made from the 1970s to the 2000s, brightly coloured but using a lot of white and the forms outlined in black, featuring blob and disc shapes, painted thickly, like lumps or pom poms.
!Durham Jimmy.
A Native Australian artist who makes junk sculptures, which appear to fetish objects. The sculptures often have text applied. Durham's work is concerned with the displacement of the Aboriginal people and their culture. 
!Gainsborough, Sir Thomas.

!Egglestone William.
American photographer who made black and white photographs of working people and city scenes in the 1930s and 1940s
!Eichelman Volker.
German artist born in the late 1970s who made photo collages using interior design magazines and strips of text.
!Eisenman Nicole.
American artist who was one of the so-called 'bad girls', women artists working in the 1990s in New York who used pornographic or otherwise potentially offensive imagery in their work. Eisenman made wall sized paintings depicted pseudo classical scenes. 
!Eliasson Olafur.
Norwegian artist who makes minimal and sometimes barely visible interventions, as in his installation of frosted transparent tape applied in vertical stripes the whole height of the glass curtain wall in the foyer of the Museum of Modern Art in New York subtly but substantially altering the visitor's experience of this public area. 
!Emin Tracy.
British artist and in the forefront of the Brit Art group of artists who came to prominence in the 1990s in London. Emin was born in the 1960s in Margate, a British seaside town which features prominently in her work. Emin's work is essentially a diary of her life, reflecting on her state of mind particularly in relation to her love life and her emotional life. Emin relates experiences that for most remain personal, such as her abortion, her rape, her breakdown, drunken and regretted sex, good sex, the break-up of relationships, her problems with alcohol and her feelings about her absent father. These are represented in a wide variety of media: video, drawings, mono-prints, text, neon signs, textiles, embroidery, and installation. Emin's consistent poetry and diary writing underpins her work.
Her video works include 'Why I never became a dancer' made in the early 1990s showing Emin dancing in Margate. In 2000 Emin made a video in which she appears (achieved with editing) twice as good Tracy and bad Tracey, sitting together and chatting on a couch. The toe dress differently and behave differently, both are likeable in different ways, one is drinking a cup of tea and the other a glass of wine. It seems to be an interview of some sort, or perhaps a therapy session, and the glass of wine emerges as the main difference between the two Tracy's for this film is a tale of the Jekyll and Hyde effect of alcohol.
Emin achieved notoriety when she embroidered and appliquéd the inside of an ordinary one person tent with the names of all the people she had ever slept with. This was quite a long list of mostly men including several male artists, but also siblings and women friends who she had shared a bed with. In order to view the work the viewer had to crawl into the very small tent (which had only room for two),, recline since there was no room to stand and become very intimate indeed with both Emin's work an possibly the other occupant of the tent. 
Emin also embroidered an upholstered chair and made a series of appliquéd and embroidered quilts. The quilts bore text legends and patterns, using patterned and plain fabric and basic embroidery stitches onto bedspreads and blankets. The legends were of life and love and art, (they also featured in the neon signs); 'Indeed art like I need god' being one of the most memorable. The quilts were usually dated. The use of such homely, amateurish and not spectacularly well executed craft techniques allied with such explicit personal statements brought Emin much attention.
Emin had a number of works made in neon, either from her writings or her poetry. The neon letters either a single sentence or a verse, often in pink, were mounted on the gallery wall. 
Emin consistently made drawings and monoprints, often accompanied by descriptive sentences or titles as part of the drawing. These are often explicit, showing her menstruating, lying in a drunken heap, happy and in love, masturbating. They are very simple drawn in a childish hand in pen, pencil or a blue black ink for the monoprints, that belies their effectiveness.
In the mid 1990s Emin opened a shop with another artist Sarah Lucas, which sold trinkets, souvenirs and t shirts all of which were made by the artists. For example an ashtray with a picture of Damien Hirst's head on it (which has since become a collectors item). When the shop closed Emin opened the Tracey Emin Museum, essentially a live work space which she opened to the public regularly each week and sold work from. Her insistence on non-exclusivity as manifested by the shop and the museum, coupled with her appropriation of 'anyone can do it' craft methods and materials captured the zeitgeist of the time, and contributed to a surge in public interest in contemporary art, which had always been seen as elitist, even if this interest was often prurient, Emin was ultimately persuasive. She also took up many of the areas of investigation of women artist in the 1970s and updated them. Emin was extremely influential to a whole generation of artists, especially women.
The work that crowned Emin's reputation (for notoriety or otherwise) was Bed, exhibited in the 2000 Turner Prize exhibition in London's Tate gallery. This is the bed in which Emin spent many days during her breakdown, drinking, smoking, eating, having sex. The bed and the surrounding detritus, empty bottles, food plates, glasses, pill packets, dirty clothes including underwear, overflowing ashtrays, a soiled tampon, books and magazines, was exhibited on a plinth to great public outcry.
Since 2000 Emin has continued to make works on paper and also to make more sculpture, including a rickety wooden tower which can be climbed, and a stuffed bird on a plinth. Birds have been a part of her personal iconography throughout her career. 
!Ensor James.
Belgian symbolist artist who lived in Ostend where his former home can still be visited, During the 1890s Ensor made a painting of a crowd of  people including several in clowns masks, one white masked person wearing top hat making a particular impression. The painting has a slightly nightmarish effect.
!Epstein Jacob.
British sculptor working between the 19450s and 60s, Epstein is now dead. His best known work is 'Rock Drill' in Tate Gallery in London, the head and torso of a futuristic automaton-like creature with a head the shape of an animals skull that is quite sinister. The breastplate ribcage is carved with angular geometric lines. The head is turned to one side. Some of Epstein's work reflects the agony of war. Epstein worked mostly in stone although he did make some bronze casts. Jacob and the Angel is a massive male and a female figure both with huge thick limbs embracing each other. It is carved from a tan coloured but translucent stone. Epstein made a similar carving of a prone figure, a little like an Egyptian mummy.
!Escher M C.
German artist who made a number of extremely detailed and precise drawings of fantasy interiors and architecture, always with an impossible perspective or optical trick. Escher was extremely skilled at drawing. Example of his work, which was reproduced on a vast scale, are an interior with a staircase descending around four walls which never goes anywhere, a pattern of black and white doves which becomes something else, and a hand drawing itself which becomes a hand drawing itself. The endgame of Esher's work is characteristic, everything appears to return to itself. He uses graphic optical illusion, including tricks of perspective such making something flip from convex to concave continuously. 
!Espaliu Pepe.
South American artist born in the 1960s who made a piece of work with a large quantity of old clothes, involving him cycling round the trunk of a tree on a platform that encircled the trunk just below the canopy.
!Evans Walker.
American photographer who took photographs of rural America during the thirties Depression.
!Fabre Jan.
Belgian artist who is very interested in insects. Since the 1970s Fabre has been making large scale theatrical performances usually featuring himself and others dressed as insects or in costumes covered with insects. Fabre also makes objects and paintings encrusted with insects, particularly beetles. The dark iridescence of their wings and shells fascinates him. 
!Fahlstrom Ovind.
!Faier Jonathan.
German artist who made a video with Johannes Rust and one other artist in which they put together a large number of clips from news footage and advertisements featuring corporate logos, editing it and giving it an ironic and humorous soundtrack to represent their appropriated material as a fast paced and amusing look at global capitalism and consumerism. This video is an example of a way of working that emerged in the late 1990s as video editing technology became universally accessible so that anyone with a camcorder and a TV could edit video. Johan Grimonprez's D-I-A-L history is another example.

!Fairhurst, Angus.
British artist who makes drawings and collages and digitally animated drawing videos.
!Fairnington, Mark.
Faithfull, Simon
British artist who has made a number of works for the web.
!Falconbridge, Brian.
Born around 1950, Falconbridge has made very small an detailed finely constructed sculptures, often relying on balance and tension in their construction.
!Fanni Tutti Cosey.
British video and performance artist who has been working since the 1960s. Fanni Tutti's most recent work is painting. The work for which she is best known is a series of live events made on her won and with the band COUM transmission (later to become Throbbing Gristle). Fanni Tutti often appeared half naked. One image is always associatied with her showing her  reclining on a bed, wearing underwear but bare breasted and wearing a blindfold. She made a number of photographic works which imitate soft porn photography. 
!Fecteau, Vincent.
Artist working in the 1990s onwards who makes sculptures from wood sometimes painted that have strong references to modernism
!Feinstein, Rachel.
American artist born in the 1960s who makes sculptures from particle board and other timber sheet material, polystyrene, paint and a variety of other media. The sheet material is cut into shapes and assembled as the framework of a sculpture. Sometimes it is spray painted. Feinstein's work has a theatrical feel to it, as if she were making a kind of prop or stage set. She made a number of works that seemed to be futuristic flowers. Later works are made only of painted board cut into shapes, often silhouettes of people. The sculptures are usually no more than 2 metres in height.
!Fend, Peter.
Artist born in the 1960s who made a film of himself jumping around with only a jumper and a pair of shoes on.
!Fernandez, Sam.
American artist working in the 1960s and 70s, Fernandez made psychedelic paintings, which were sometimes used for record covers. They consist of a richly dense background of patterns and flowers which flows into the main element of the image. Fernandez's work influenced graphic design and was re-discovered in the 1990s by a new generation of artists. 
!Fetting, Rainer.
German painter born in the 1950s who made large figurative paintings, for example one of a row of men in shower, painted in blues and whites, in an expressionistic style.
!Finland, Tom of.
Pencil drawings of gay men variously dressed in leather, naked, sometimes in a state of sexual arousal. The drawings have something of the style of the drawings that used to be shown in barbershop windows to demonstrate hairstyles, realist, detailed and making use of the full range of pencil drawing techniques. The men in Tom of Finland's Drawings are often shown in pairs, but sometimes alone. They document specific pleasures and codes of dress very simply and straightforwardly, but for all their sexually explicit subject matter they have a strange ambiguity in terms of their purpose. 
!Finley, Karen.
Karen Finley, an American performance artist whose work, like Mapplethorp's attracted the attention of the US Christian Right. Finley received NEA money and became notorious when she was banned from performing a work in which she inserted pieces of yam into her vagina. When she brought this work to London the Institute of Contemporary Arts was forced to bow to local authority pressure and ban it. Finley continued to make controversial performance work centring around themes of child abuse, sexual identity and the female body, often in the form of a monologue by a character who was in turns aggressive and profane.
!Finn Kelsey Rose.
British artist born in the 1950s, Finn Kelcey made a number of performance works in the 1980s and early 1990s, one using shadow puppets. In the late 1990s she made Matador, a work for which she trained as a matador in Spain and took part in a bullfight. The work itself existed as documentation. She later made an installation titled Steam Bed which consisted of a large square brushed steel trough from which copious amounts of steam were emitted. The steam was sucked towards an extractor fan of the same dimensions as the trough, creating an illusory solid form, a cube of steam between the two.
!Fischli and Weiss.
Swiss artists born in the 1950s who work in partnership. Peter Fischli and David Weiss make installation, photographic and video art. They are interested in nature, animals, cause and effect and the human condition. Early works consist of the artists dressed as animals filmed walking in the countryside, a series of realistic replica interiors fro example a store room, the artists' studio in which every item and piece of furniture is modelled from clay and cast in rubber, in a variety of solid colours, producing a simultaneously convincing and perplexing version of reality. 
Fischli and Weiss made a number of photographic works in which they created art works with food, for example, Still Life with Cold Meats shows an arrangement of sliced sausage, frankfurters and gherkins. Photographic work is always part of their practise, most usually presented as a slide projection or light box. Indeed much of Fischli and Weiss's video work is very static and closer to photography. 
A slide projection featuring hundreds of images of flowers, shown grouped into seasons, each slide dissolving into the next so that a complex double image is created, takes about an hour to view. It has a mesmeric effect. An illuminated table, about 15meters long and one metre wide is used to display hundreds of images of land and city scapes, each one about 6 cm wide. At first off putting this work also draws the viewer in as they try to make connections between the images and inadvertently construct their own narrative.
Video work is often similarly open-ended, as in one installation of about 12 monitors placed in a room, all showing different images of landscape, but not simultaneously so that some screens were blue while others are playing. The viewer is directed to move about the room by the monitors' apparently random showings.
Fischli and Weiss's best known static video work is Pussy, a single shot film of a black and white cat drinking milk from a saucer. This was made to be projected on a huge LED screen above Times Square in New York, where it achieved a monumental quality.
Perhaps their best known video is The Way Things Go, a film of the progression of a series of inanimate objects caused to move by a  cause and effect chain of events. Using simple science, physics and common sense, and using wood, metal, a variety of vessels, balls, weights, fire, steam, salt, batteries, and ice, the artists made a series of structures, balances, ramps, slopes, water channels, tubes, pipes and levers that are set in motion be each other over a period of about half and hour. Basic principles of physics using steam for expansion, melting, burning, balancing, rocking, tipping and velocity for example are used to propel water down a slope into a bucket which tips filling a tank with something floating on the surface which when it reaches a ball cock pushes a weight down on a platform which sets a ball rolling and so on.. This is filmed in an empty warehouse space. 
Fischli and Weiss often make questions part of their work, as if they are involved in some kind of research. The question with which they are most often associated is Are animals People? At the Venice biennale in 2003 they presented a work in which they simply projected a series of questions on a wall in enormous letters, one of which was Will Happiness Find Me?
!Flanagan Barry.
British sculptor working from the 1960s onwards, first mainly making semi-abstract stone sculptures until the 1980s when he began to make figurative work and took the hare as his motif. Flanagan achieved great success with a series of sculptures featuring the figure of a hare roughly modelled in clay, its legs exaggerated in length, cast in bronze, often painted in ultramarine, in a running leaping pose, set upon a plinth made of a crisscrossed rectangle of lengths of planed wood. This hare and plinth combination was repeated in many different materials.
!Flavin Dan.
American artist working in the 1970s and 80s, Flavin took fluorescent tubes and the coloured light they produce as his medium. He created sculptures by leaning the tubes against the wall sometimes two or three, sometimes a whole row, sometimes placed casually at different angles, sometimes measured and at the same angle. Some tubes might be placed on the floor. The transformers and cables are very visible and are part of the work, something which is commonplace now but was not when Flavin made these works. Examples of works are a row of cold white tubes leaning at a slight angle against the wall, a formation of cold blue coloured tubes mounted on the wall in a cruciform, which shines out its light giving the impression of something celestial or perhaps extraterrestrial. Flavin became skilled at using the colours of the light as sculptural form.
!Fleury Sylvie.
French artist working from the 1980s onwards. Fleury is interested in consumerism and in the relation between fashion and desire. One work consisted of  shopping bags from different high fashion shops, placed in a casual arrangement on a plinth. The bags themselves took on a significance beyond their actual existence as carrier of luxury goods, they seemed to be as good as the good they might have contained, to even transcend them, so clearly did their names, logos, colours and designs advertise a particular way of life, style and aspiration. Fleury also made works with shoes.
!Floyer Ceal.
British artist born in the 1960s who has made many works using light as her main medium. However Floyer's earliest works are a pair of brass door fingerplates with the inscriptions pushed and pulled on them, and a red dot of the kind galleries use to indicate that a work has been sold, which in reality was a hole in the wall filled with red pigment. Both poetic interventions into the mundane, which is what characterises Floyer's work. 
A lot of Floyer's early works are slide projections. Light switch, made in the early 1990s, is a slide projection of a photograph of an ordinary household light switch, projected onto a wall where a light switch might be. The projector is not concealed at all. The projection looks exactly like a real light switch prompting a double take, and the viewer, surprisingly, does not readily associate the projector with the image. Floyer achieved full suspension of disbelief by presenting something utterly ordinary in a magical way. Light Under The Door consisted of a projector placed in front of a door, projecting a strip of light the exact dimensions of the space under the door, at this space. The effect was of an incredibly strong light was coming from behind the door, enough to make the viewer want to investigate, when in fact the light source was readily visible at the viewers feet.
In a similar vein, a photograph of an illuminated light bulb was projected on to a switched off light bulb, making it a light source in a new way. A light was projected down through a light bulb, projecting the text on the bulb (brand name, wattage etc) onto the ground below, again prompting a kind of double take since when this work is viewed it seems like something that should happen every time a light bulb is switched on.
Floyer began to work with sound in the late 1990s, presenting a work in which the sound of a slide projector is recorded and pressed onto vinyl, which is played on a turntable on a plinth. The viewer looks for the slide projection, which is not there, and eventually associates what they are hearing with what they are 
This slippage, between what is heard and seen, or what is seen and understood is Floyer's main interest. Around the same time, she made a video of a dog just outside the frame, jumping into the frame regularly leaping for an invisible ball. Once again it takes a certain amount of watching to work out what is happening. An apparently abstract static image suddenly moves and turns out to be a white net curtain against a window which occasionally flaps in the breeze, and when it touches the window becomes more transparent. A piece of screwed up white paper, fluttering in an eddy of wind in an empty cul-de-sac, resembles, when the film is looped, a white butterfly forever fluttering in the same place. 
Floyer's interest in light extended to an interest in all things white, and indeed she has not used colour at all unless the object she wishes to use is coloured. A till receipt is placed on the wall and seems to be nothing more than that, until the viewer realises that every object on the list is white in colour (milk, flour, lard etc.) 
In 2003 Floyer made a work for the Tate gallery in London, She installed a bell which rang a regular intervals, a bit like the bell that summons an audience into an auditorium. This created a sense of expectation, and a feeling in the viewer that they ought to obey the abstract summons causing them to look for a direction and finally to look at their towards where they perceive the sound to be emanating from. This act of looking is what the artist wanted to achieve. Another sound work is a recording of a drip in a bucket, played on a cassette player placed in a bucket, causing the viewer to look to the ceiling or if not to think about the sound they are hearing as being generated by a drip coming from the ceiling which they know is not there. Floyer's project has been to reveal the beauty in the nearly intangible.
!Fontana Luciano.
Italian artist working in the1950s and 60s, Fontana's paintings are abstract, plain flat coloured canvases with slits cut in them and sometimes textural detail added, such as painted gravel. He uses a range of colours from dark reds and blues to bright copper green. Sometimes his paintings are made on egg shaped canvases.
!Ford Laura.
British artist born in 1960s who made a number of installation works in the 1980s concerned with fairy tales and the imagination, including one performance featuring a person in a bear suit. In the 1990s Ford made a large installation of actual size stuffed toy children, made in chintz fabrics of different colours, in a range of poses.
!Forg Gunter.
German artist born in the 1950s who makes paintings, photographs and bronze sculpture. Forg typically places a large (2 meter high) black and white photograph in a frame butted up against an abstract painting of a similar size, consisting of very broad straight single brushstrokes and rectangular areas of colour in orangey red, green and other colours. His photographs are very often of women (head and shoulders) who look serious. Forg's bronze sculptures are the same size as the paintings and photographs, in fact they could be described as sculptures of paintings. The bronzes are about 30cm deep 2 metre height rectangular panels which stand, in portrait format, on bases which slope straight down from and are one piece with the panels. The surface of the bronze is covered with impasto marks presumably made in clay with a palette knife, as if to indicate that this might be a cast of a painting. These monolithic objects are placed around the gallery space in relation to the works on the wall.
!Fortnum Rebecca.
Births artist born in the 1960s whose abstract paintings made in the 1980s and 90s have been described as feminist abstraction. Fortnum often painted a cut or slit as a metaphor for the female body, the interior, a metaphor employed by many women artists in the 1980s and early 90s (which can also be seen in the work of Cathy de Monchaux). This arose from readings of Lacan, a French psychoanalyst whose ideas about 'lack' in the female psyche and about language and femininity were taken up by feminist artists and theorists. Fortnum was also interested in a general discussion about the female body as a 'text' (in the sense that the term used in literary theory) and the 'writing out' of performing of that text being essential to the representation of femininity. Fortnum's paintings, symbolise this lack, and the writing out of the female, by the painted slit or cut, (never an actual cut) and by text she writes on the canvas, sometimes unreadable writing like marks, sometimes actual words. 
Fortnum's paintings are very large, up to 3 metres high, and she predominantly used dark reds and browns. The paintings are a fairly flat colour with brush marks, except where she has chosen to paint the slit, which is made with very thick paint squeezed and brushed. Writing is done with a very small brush in a flowing hand, usually a single line of text running horizontally across the painting.
!Fra Angelico.
Medieval Italian painter of religious subjects.
!Fragonard.
French late eighteenth century painter who is known for his paintings of women and children in the countryside or in a garden. Fragonard's many portraits depict an idyllic life, as in Girl on a Swing and his many paintings of society women in beautiful dresses, children. Fragonard's paintings are full of trees, flowers and grass in the background, and the detail of the subjects clothes is given great attention. 
!Francois Michel.
Belgian artist born 1950s who makes large scale photographic installations. 
!Frankland John.
British artist born around 1960 who makes sculpture and installation. Frankland's early works were a series of site specific installations in which he used plastic sheeting, stretched over battens, to line the walls of a space, creating a second skin inner wall that appeared to be very solid and shiny but was in fact only a thin layer of cheap plastic. He did this in black plastic in a cellar, in silver grey plastic on a freestanding form that looked like a giant metal wall, and in gold metal along a wall in a gallery. IN this last work, Lift, he arranged the battening and supports so that there was the illusion of minimal gold metal lift doors set into a gold wall, with a hemispherical convex form pushed out from the back of the plastic to represent the button for calling the lift the only detail.
Following this Frankland made a work in which he painted a section of tree trunk in bright yellow high gloss paint, using so many layers that the detail of the truck is smoothed out so that it appears at first sight to be a model of a tree trunk. The trunk is mounted on the wall at chest height defying its tremendous weight. There is a  contradiction between the possible lightness of the trunk if it is a fibreglass cast, and the reality of the weight of the wood.
Frankland later made a site specific work for a sculpture park which consisted of his selection of a one ton boulder from a quarry placed in a site of his choice.
!Freidrich Casper David.
German nineteenth century romantic painter many of whose works were painted from nature on an island in the Baltic sea off the coast of Germany. and chiefly known for his interpretation of the Romantic sublime, meaning a rendering of nature so beautiful as to seem almost like heaven. This deeply subjective approach was of great interest to many critics and writers struggling with the idea of authorship, subjectivity and the purpose of art after Kant. Ideas also dealt with by Mary Shelley in Frankenstein and by English poets such as Wordsworth and Shelley.
Friedrich's paintings usually less than 200 by 100 cm in size. Nearly always featured a solitary figure in a landscape, for example a moonlit night with a ruined folly on a hilltop peak and a figure on a closer peak the canvas rendered in blues and greys, or a figure in a rain and windswept landscape with barren trees, or a figure in a moonlit garden with a balustrade, a classical statue and a broken urn. He painted in cool reduced palette. Moonlit scenes are rendered in shades of blue. Freidrich's idealism and his pitting of man against the elements made him seem reactionary at times.
!Freud Lucien.
British figurative painter born in the 1930s, Freud began his career precociously in his teens and was still painting in 2003. He paints portraits, usually of models, sometimes of friends, family, and sometimes of well known people, although rarely accepts commissions. His models are almost always nude, or semi-clothed and painted in accurate detail, but with a psychological perspective. They are often lying down. The predominant colours of the paintings are consistent: skin tones, and the greys and browns of his studio, the background to all his works since he never paints anywhere else. A painting may take up to 20 or so sittings, and some sitters are not able to continue. He has often painted a favourite model repeatedly. 
Some of Freud's paintings might be of two people lying together, or there may be a dog, often a greyhound. He favours gaunt loose skinned physiques but has also painted larger people. He has painted many self portraits. 
Freud's subjects include his lovers, his models (sometimes the tow are the same), his daughters, artist Leigh Bowery, the Queen of England, and the fashion model Kate Moss.
!Frink Elizabeth.
British artist born in the 1930s who from the 1960s onwards has made heads, bronze heads, busts and equestrian statues. The surface of the sculptures is usually roughly modelled. Frink is particularly known for her distinctive thin figures riding a horse bare back whose tiny heads have strangely flat features, which can be seen in many public sites in London. 
!Fritsch Katarina.
Artist working in the late 1990s and early 2000s.
!Frize Bernard.
German, artist who makes process paintings, using multiple clear and bright colours of thin paint in several distinct and apparently continuous brushstrokes, wet into wet, to create a simple repeated pattern. The means of execution of the painting are puzzling for it appears that it would be impossible for the brush strokes to be juxtaposed in the way that they are.
!Frost Terry.
British artist who was a later member of the St. Ives group in the 1950s and 60s. Frost made abstract pattern painting, painting irregular squashed circular shapes in a repeated pattern, in black and white with red, dark green, blue and other colours. Sometimes the paintings would consist of a part of a large solid black circle on one side of the canvas, and a part of a red circle on the opposite side. Frosts paintings were very in tune with the fashions and design of the 1950s and 60s, with their clean lines, minimal forms and bright colours with black and white.
!Gabo Naum.
Eastern European artist who often lived and worked in Britain, Gabo made sculptures and maquettes for proposed sculptures from wood, metal, Perspex and acrylic, wire and thread. Gabo's formalist abstract structures have a strong architectural element in their reliance on apparent tension and cantilevering for their structural strength, and clearly influenced by Russian constructivism and Suprematism, but they also relate to the sculptural forms of Barbara Hepworth, in which voids and solid form are often given tension by thread or wires across them in parallel lines. Most of his work is very small, around 40 cm high. 
Gabo's use of very new materials and his architectural forms made him unique in his time, and Gabo developed a body of work which is singular in its devotion to an aesthetic and to material. He also made preparatory drawings and sketches. 
!Gainsborough Sir Thomas.
eighteenth century British artist who is best known for a painting titled Mrs and Mrs (name) showing a couple and their children and dog under a tree with a house in the background. The man wears breeches, a tail coat and a hat, and is leaning on a shotgun, the woman has on a fine low necked dress which is light blue and white with a straw hat. They are dressed in their country clothes, but there is no pretence - this is a painting of the couples wealth and social status, showing them confidently engaging the viewer from the rural beauty of their large estate. Gainsborough in fact had painted the best known portrait of the new English bourgeoisie, the landed gentry. As such this is a very important painting.  
!Gallaccio Anya.
British artist born in the 1960s who has made a number of installations since the 1990s. One of her first involved paining the walls of a gallery with chocolate. The colour was reminiscent of a dirty protest, the smell in contrast overpoweringly sweet. She also made a curtain to hang in a gallery window from dark orange gerbera flower heads strung on threads the height of the window.  
!Gaston Vidya.
Artist working in partnership with another artist who has made work in the 1990s and 2000s that consist of woollen pom poms placed on Perspex boxes. The pom poms are made in the way that children make them, by threading wool around tow circles of card with a hole in the middle and then cutting between the circles. They are made in a range of sizes and colours, usually muted, from about 60 cm in diameter to 2 cm. The plinths are various sized too. 
The artists have made other kinds of work.
!Gauguin Paul.
French painter working in the 1870s and 80s who made figurative paintings. His early works were landscapes and portraits. Gauguin was an opinionated member of the Parisian art world. He was a very close friend of Van Gogh and they lived together in Arles in the south of France. Gauguin supported Van Gogh and encouraged him, helping him through periods of madness including the ear dismembering incident. Towards the end of his life Gauguin moved to Tahiti and painted the works with which he is most readily associated (although they are not necessarily seen as his best), showing Tahitian people, often women, in native dress, with the interiors of traditional homes and beach scenes. The colours he uses are very strong bold and sun drenched, with the brown skin colour of his subjects predominating. 
In Tahiti Gauguin surrendered to his life long addiction to alcohol and women and he died there.
!Genovese Anna.
British sculptor born in the 1970s who make small scale models of large environments or tracts of land, for example deserts. A desert complete with an oases might be modelled on a domestic scale. Genovese also makes fibreglass 'puddles'.
!Gensken Isa.
German artist who makes sculptural objects and collages. The objects might be concrete forms reminiscent of building materials placed together to form rudimentary architectural structures of about 3 metres in height. Or long wooden spear like forms 4 metres tapered at both ends. Other works include collections of metal cooking utensils, such as sieves, whisks, knives, colanders, graters and peelers, strung together with chains and hung in clusters on the wall. Presented in this was these banal domestic objects seem somehow sexual and perverse. Gensken also made a series of 30cm square collages of nudes cut up and re-joined to make strange human forms. 
In 2002 Gensken made a series of small sculptures that look like maquettes for skyscrapers, made form found materials such as fruit crates, cellophane, printed matter, cardboard and glass, and roughly formed with copious amounts of glue oozing from the joins. This work is about the re-building of Berlin, the changing from a faded modernist architecture to the new skyscrapers. 
!Gentileschi Artemisia.
an Italian artist who was Perhaps the best known woman painter of the classical period. Her best known painting is a portrait of a woman.
!Gericault Theodore.
French artist who made history paintings, most significantly The Raft of the Medusa. This is a very large (2 metre high) and shows a shipwreck scene with the survivors clinging to a raft in a stormy sea. The painting shows a real event which had happened in the recent past. In this sense this painting was a news picture, conveying very vividly the terror of the survivors.
!Gerz Jochen and partner.
German artist who worked with his wife. The Gerzs realised several public sculptures most notably two holocaust memorials. The Sinking Monument is a lead covered square column which is gradually sinking in into the ground on which it stands, where it will eventually over a number of years fill a hole exactly its size and disappear for ever. The soft lead surface invites graffiti, as it is so easy to scratch into. In a reversal of the customary civic practise of removing any graffiti or making it difficult to carry out, the Gerz's column asks the viewer to add to it. The idea is that much of the graffiti will be concerned with the holocaust and that people will engrave the names of those they lost. The monument will take these names underground and they will remain there for ever, a subterranean plinth to a memorial plaque on the surface. 
The other memorial is sited in front of the Reichstag in Berlin. The Gerzs and a number of student volunteers researched into a number of Jewish cemeteries known to have been destroyed and built over. Lists of the names of those buried in these places were obtained. At night they removed cobblestones from the street in front of the building and carved the name of one of the deceased on the bottom. The stones would then be replaced. Eventually all of those whose graves had been lost were symbolically reburied in a permanent and subversive act.
!Gerz Ori.
artist working in the 1990s and 2000s who took a panoramic photo of a London football stadium and presented it on 25 metre gallery wall.
!Ghiberti Lorenzo de.
Italian renaissance painter
!Giacommetti Alberto.
Italian artist working at the turn of the century. Giacommetti's bronze sculptures are extremely elongated usually standing figures, sometimes single figures, sometimes pairs or groups. They are not more than human height and often much smaller. The legs and arms are no more than rods of metal, the bodies agglomerations of bronze that seen to serve merely to join the limbs, not much more than 30 cm wide, the heads small. The sculptures are modelled roughly. 
Giacommetti's sculptures often imply movement, the figures seem to be about to walk. They are solitary and isolated, reduced to essences of the human form. Giacommetti made a large number of working drawings. 
!Gilbert and George.
British artists born in the 1950s who have lived and worked together in a longstanding partnership. They began to work together in their twenties, when they moved into a house in London's East End and began their life as art existence rigidly regulated by both banal and eccentric habits. They became as well known for their lifestyle, and their deadpan personae as for their work. In the early years of their careers Gilbert and George rarely spoke about their work or lives together unless in a very cryptic manner. George, who has a strong eastern European accent, did all the talking, Gilbert spoke only in the most stilted manner in an upper class accent. They parried all interviewers questions by assuming an impenetrably eccentric manner. It was never clear whether or not they were having the last laugh. 
Gilbert and George lived together in a sparse house, wore tweed suits, hats and overcoats, ate in the same café every day of the year, and were never seen without each other.
Their early work was performance. They held many soirees with invited performers, poetry readings, all conducted with an anachronistic formality, including the letterpress invitation cards. They became well known for their work 'underneath the Arches', made in about 1975, for which they became 'singing sculptures'. They stood, their clothes and bodies entirely covered in silver paint, on a plinth underneath the arches of One of the bridges over the Thames and sang the music hall song of the same name continuously. 
In the 1980s Gilbert and George began to make the collaborative photographic work for which they are now known. They began to make photo collages by making self portraits in which they appeared, full length, usually one on each side of the image. The kind of symmetry found in religious diptychs seemed to be a reference point. 
Initially these were small black and white works, the subject matter images of London, flowers and plants, often repeated in a mirror image. Later they began to photograph young men and boys that they had met around London. The compositions began to have a scatological and sexual theme and were often directly abusive. Swear words began to appear. The artists themselves usually featured, the other men and boys often seemed to be submissive.
By the 1990s, Gilbert and George were making works that set out to shock, using images of human faeces and naked men, including themselves. 
The images are printed in square sections which are placed together in a grid to make a large image often 3 metres square. Each section is has a thin frame usually red, and there is no pretence at being one large image.
Eventually what had been shocking about the works became its trademark. The Gilbert and George photo collage became an instantly recognisable trademark.
!Gillick Liam.
British artist who born in around 1960 who works in a variety of media. Text is integral to Gillick's work both visually and because he has written a number of books which he also designs, for example Erasmus is Late (which has a yellow cover with the title punched through in ticker tape lettering), and published texts which are part of his practise. In both texts and visual work he explores the legacy of and iconography of modernism, in particular its architectural and graphic forms, and urban and social space. There is a strongly liberal political aspect to Gillick's work. He often uses quotation relating to politically significant historical events (such as the English civil war) in his work, an approach which ultimately gives Gillick's work a didactic quality. 
For Gillick the design of printed material is of paramount importance, equal to the construction of his sculptural works.
For example Gillick's 'Conversation Platforms' are panels made from squares of apparently random coloured Perspex sheets set in an aluminium framework to make a grid. The panel is then hung above head height and the viewer will be standing under it. These works have expanded into more complex and architectural structures, featuring sections of wall as well as platforms, and even a huge suspended ceiling, always using different colours of Perspex. 
Gillick has also made a large number of works on paper often consisting of works on paper, many of them proposals for the graphic design projects or architectural designs for the facades of buildings. In addition to his ideas for transforming public spaces he makes proposals for social events, some of which are carried out, as for example when he scheduled a programme of yoga classes to take place in a gallery under and around his Perspex platforms.
Gillick's approach is ideological; part social scientist, part philosophical theorist, part artist, part liberal political, he presents a vision of the world which has clean lines, perfectly considered typographic style, well designed building, where history can be reconsidered and there is a lot to read. 
!Giorgione.
Italian artist who painted The Flagellation of St Jerome, depicting the middle aged saint, with a thin sagging body, long grey hair and a beard, alone in penitent pose in his room, naked save for a red cloth around his loins. Jerome is surrounded by symbolic objects and is in the act of self flagellation with a long leather whip.
!Glass Kerstin.
British artist born in the 1970s who paints images of female models from magazines, juxtaposed in the manner of a collage, with a text title running across the painting. the women are painted realistically, and are fashionable dressed and made up often in punk and Goth fashions. The paintings have echoes of 80s design. 
!Gluzberg, Margarita.
British artist born in the 1960s who makes very realistic detailed pencil drawings of women, about 2 metres high. 
!Gober Robert. 
American artist born in the 1960s, Gober's work consider the human body and landscape. He has made a series of works using wax casts of his body parts, for example legs and hands. These are realistically finished down to the last hair, and installed in odd ways, for example a leg and foot may project from wall at right angles to it. His has made many Installations featuring body parts, for example a room papered with the artist's own design of wall paper, a forest of trees with sinister things going on among them and leg sculptures sticking out of wall. Another theme is that of 'orifices'. Gober will often make circular openings with metal facings and plugholes, highly finished but ambiguous in terms of position and function. It is as if the external world is seen as a metaphor fro the human body, and the orifices in the world might lead to a mysterious interior which provokes both curiosity and repulsion. 
Everything Gober makes is made very well with attention to detail and exactly specified materials. In the early 2000s he began to make huge scale installations, for example a large gallery space which is empty apart from a small grill in the floor. Looking through this grille it is possible to discern an apparently real river bed and pool stretching under the floor, creating the impression that the whole of the gallery floor is covering a piece of nature. Somewhere there is a figure of Christ.
Gober also made a piece of work featuring a bridal dress.
!Godfrey Isaacs Laura.
British artist born around 1960 who made wall reliefs that lead eventually to polyurethane foam sculptures reminiscent of the work of Lydia Benglis. The foam in Godfrey Isaacs sculptures is brightly coloured and the forms often jokily allude to the female body. Godfrey Isaacs ceased working as an artist in the late 1990s and opened her own home as a gallery and venue.
!Golden, Pamela.
British artist who makes paintings.
!Goldin Nan.
American artist born in the 1950s, during the 1980s and early 1990s Goldin photographed her own life obsessively. Every detail of the lives of her friends in New York was recorded as she spent time with them. People are photographed sleeping, eating, sober, drunk, fixing up, having sex, getting dressed, in the bath, on the toilet, kissing, cooking, talking, singly and in groups, meeting the camera or looking away. Most of them are artists, musicians, actors and their friends. There are straight and gay couples, single parents, families, children. 
There is a sense of a window on private lives but never a sense of intrusion. A subject might have a black eye, or be menstruating. The subjects are always relaxed in the presence of the camera.
The resulting hundreds of images were exhibited in groups, usually printed fairly small, approximately 50cm high. The groups of images became larger, they were installed in grid formation. Ultimately they were shown as a continuously running slide projection of hundreds of images. 
Goldin's work became a testament to and document of the lives of a generation. This is particularly poignant because many of her friends were gay and this was the generation that was most drastically affected by deaths from the AIDS related disease. Thus this body of work is also memorial. However it is not in any sense melancholic, rather it is experienced as a record of the intimate lives of one generation of mostly young New Yorkers. 
The success of Goldin's work led to her being sought after for commissioned projects, which she resisted, preferring to continue to record her life and the lives of others. 
!Goldstein Jack.
American artist born in the 1950s who has made a number of 16 mm films and videos. Goldstein's work often has a formal simplicity that belies his choice of medium. He may chose to film something that is barely there, that hardly moves. He uses animation on top of the film, for example in a film of a willow pattern plate, which show simply the plate seen face on, in a static shot, one of the birds in the pattern comes to life and flys off the plate. In another a figure of a person is outlined in tiny red lights and moves, the lights shining blurrily.
!Goldsworthy Andrew.
British artist born in the 1950s who makes land art - site specific sculptures placed in the landscape. Goldsworthy began in the 1980s to make small sculptures from leaves and twigs, which he would photograph in the landscape. The photograph is the document of the work. Sometimes he arranged leaves, for example grading the different colours of fallen autumn leaves and arranging them in a pattern. Constructing sculptures and floating them on water. But he also used growing plants, staking the branches of willow trees to from a living structure, weaving twigs into circles. He then began to use snow to make sculptural forms. 
Goldsworthy's work always relates the natural materials and the environment in which they are found to the final form that the artist creates for them. It also makes associations with the history of ritual and nature and the resulting artefacts.
Gradually Goldsworthy's work became larger scale. He travelled widely in search of new landscapes to work with for example to Alaska. 
!Golub Leon.
American artist born in the 1930s or 40s who makes abstract paintings.
!Gontarski Steven.
American artist born in the 1970s who makes figurative sculptures. Gontarski began in the late 90s to make life-size figures made from fabric sewn tighter in the style of a stuffed toy on top of an armature. The figures were distorted human forms made from shiny plastics and vinyl, elongated and featureless, their limbs often joining and intertwined. The combinations of fabric alluded to garments, indeed sometimes a part of a garment might be incorporated into the sculpture. The lumpen feet might have a stripe alluding to but looking nothing like a trainer. Gontarski's soft sculptures are dancers, made from a combination of formal sculptural forms of example Henry Moore with club wear and fashion. Along with the sculptures he made drawings on acetate, and later on Perspex sheet. These were simple outlines in fibre tip marker featuring people that he had meet and odd lines from their conversation.
In 2000 Gontarski began to make similar figures from cast fibreglass, finished in one colour of a high gloss lacquer often pearlescent or metallic. The figures began to take on a molten morphology, like a mixture of Rodin, Boccioni and the molten baddy in the film Terminator 2. the figures twist and dance, and are placed on plinths made of the same material and of a part with the sculpture. The plinths are sprayed with graffiti, done not by the artist but by graffiti artists that the artist has met. 
Gontarski has also made a series of busts in a similar way. These refer to the generic bronze bust which one might see anywhere. There might be a hole right through the face in Gontarski's smoothed out and rendered version. One in a virgin Mary figure painted in white.
!Gonzales Torres Felix. 
American artist born around 1960 who made sculptures and installations. Gonzales Torres died in the late 1990s. During his lifetime his father died as did many of his friends from AIDS related illness. His work is preoccupied with death. 
Gonzales Torres used a variety of media, usually with minimal intervention on his part. The work he did was in choosing his material, decisions about quantity and [placement. For example he presented a simple stack of his own weight in sheets of newsprint. The weight of his dead father in ivory coloured sweets, is laid out in an amorphous shape on the floor, the sweets are the same colour as bone and the visitor is invited to take one away. A way of giving out the body of his father in an obvious parallel with the Transubstantiation. This is one of a series of candy works, using different colours of sweets arranged in different abstract shaped heaps on the floor according to the subject of the work (given in the title) always to be taken away so that the work changes through interaction. Another series of works are bead curtains, floor to ceiling, strung across the width of a gallery to bisect or divide it creating a new space, partially transparent, the beads are of certain specified colours. One work included a performative element. A Male dancer naked except for silver shorts and boots dance on a podium surrounded by lights. When the dancer wasn't there the podium remained as the work, a plinth for an absent sculpture, the dancer, symbolic of death, the final curtain and the performance of life.
Gonzales Torres also made a series of light bulb works, strings of standard light bulbs to be strung in specific locations, in a tree, a stairwell for example. and he made Photographic works the most well known of which is an empty bed with white sheets each of the pillows bearing the impressions left by a head. Another is a photo graph of flowers growing in bare soil, which is titled The Grave of Gertrude Stein. Gonzales Torres' work deals with death, the fleeting nature of life, and the idea of the memorial, by using the simplest simple sculptural forms. 
!Gordon Douglas.
British artist born in the 1960s who works in a range of media, including photography, video and text. Gordon is fascinated with the visual representation of psychological states in particular in film.
Gordon made an installation for which he covered the walls with a list of All the people he knows their names applied in self adhesive lettering in columns. Gordon often uses this type of lettering. A small work appeared in a book consisting of a text about looking which ends by stating that by the time the reader has read the text, they will have been reading for 3 minutes. Gordon makes a comparison between the time taken to read and the time taken to look at images.
Gordon has made a number of video and film works. He often uses back projection onto freestanding or hanging screens in the gallery. One work shows a film from the thirties of two psychoanalysts talking to and subsequently restraining a hysterical female patient, finally pinning her down. The film is presented played forwards and backwards, resulting in very different interpretations on the viewers part. This deconstruction of found film led eventually to Gordon's best known work, 24 Hour Psycho. Gordon takes the feature film of the same name and projects it on the gallery wall, slowed down so that it takes 24 hours to play from start to finish. The gallery remains open during this time. The Resulting film provokes all kinds of new readings, and the extreme slow motion renders the famous shower scene entirely different. 
Gordon has made many works on paper including a number of photographs of film stars with the eyes cut out or replaced with plain paper, and a number of photographs of apparent actions such as his black finger tattoo, a photograph of his finger which is entirely black. 
!Gormley Antony.
British artist born in the 1950s who became very well known in Britain when he made a large scale public commission called The Angel of the North. This 30 meter high sculpture is a standing figure with no facial features or detail. Its outstretched arms have become aeroplane wings, the arms span about 40 meters. The sculpture which is made from steel, and is sited by the motorway and railway line from London to Scotland. It can be seen for miles around, and is probably the most visible and best known piece of public art in Britain.
Gormley made lead casts of parts of his body fro a number of years in the 1980s and 90s. He then began to cast his whole body and make sculptures from beaten moulded and welded lead sheet. The resulting figures are life size and have no detail or features, and are seamed where the lead sheets meet as if they are made of stitched together pieces of fabric. Some are prone some standing. Gormley has conducted a most thorough investigation into the male human form, their visual anonymity allowing the figures to stand for every person. 
Gormley became known to a much wider public when he made the participatory work Field in the early 1990s. Field consists of hundreds of 40cm high clay figures, roughly alike, placed shoulder to shoulder in a mass on the floor of the gallery. Field was partly inspired by the terracotta army of 7th century Chinese sculptures found in a burial ground.
Wherever field is exhibited it is created anew by local people, each person making their own figure from local clay. 
!Goya Francisco.
Spanish painter considered one of the greatest painters in history, Goya is particularly well known several works including The Disasters of War, The Execution of Maximilian (1814) and a series of works known as The Black Paintings. His paintings are mostly smallish, around 150 cm high at most.
Goya was a political painter whose intention was to reveal to a wider public the cruelty of war and the harshness of life for ordinary people. He was also an innovator in terms of his use of paint and colour. The Execution of Maximilian (an emperor) shows a blindfold man on the right of the canvas facing a firing squad on the right side. The scene takes place in front of a hill with some buildings behind it. Smoke is coming from the soldiers rifles. The painting depicts the actual moment of execution and was made very soon after the event. Thus it is news reportage, depicting the deposition and execution of a ruling monarch.
The Disasters of War are a series of around 30 etchings (about 40 cm high) showing scenes of carnage from the battlefield. Soldiers lie dismembered and disembowelled on the ground, they hang from trees, decapitated or genitally mutilated. Goya intended to show the gross cruelty of war and because he chose to use etching his work reached a wide audience who might otherwise have been able to try to ignore the black paintings show the life of ordinary Spanish people eking out a subsistence living on the land, living in one room. The paintings are dark and inky, there is no light. They show the harshness and ugliness of life. There is one in the series that shows a dog in quicksand, an ochre sand hill filling most of the canvas with the dogs head sticking out of it.
!Graham Dan.
American artist working in from the 1970s onwards, Graham makes architectural sculptures, usually site specific, from glass and mirrors. He creates simple structures from plate glass that invite the viewer to enter them. The reflections or the surrounding landscape and of the structure itself cause a sense of disorientation, in particular in terms of which parts of the sculpture are transparent and which are reflective. In short a confusion about what is a real image and the nature of that reality. The structures are extremely simple and formal, usually human height, often no more that a series of vertical planes placed together at angles and ramps. They are usually places in the open air as the light of the sky plays an important role in the reflectivity that is part of the work.
!Graham Rodney.
Canadian artist born in the 1950s who since the 1980s has made works in film, video, installation, photography and sound. Graham made a video showing himself as Robinson Crusoe lying beneath a palm tree sleeping until  coconut drops onto his head from the tree. He sits ups, rubs his eyes, tries to focus, feels dizzy and lies down only to have the same thing happen again, and in fact the film is a loop. This work portrays the endless loop of time lived out by Crusoe while stranded. Another film shows a house burning down. 
Graham made a sound work in which he took a segment of a piece of classical music which is not usually played when that pieces is performed, analysed it and added it to make a playable loop. He then arranged for an orchestra to play it and it was recorded.
Graham took a photograph of a tree in winter, and presented it upside down tree. The branches of the tree become the roots, and the roots the branches. On the theme of the inverted or retinal  image Gordon also installed a pinhole camera in a horse drawn carriage, giving the viewer the opportunity to enter the carriage and view the scene outside through the camera upside down. 
!Green Gregory.
American artist born in the 1960s who makes installation and sculpture. In the early 1990s Green made an installation in a small room fro which he constructed an imaginary IRA bomb factory from scratch by reading books and information freely available to the public. The process of bomb making is shown taking place in a small kitchen, the materials needed strewn everywhere, empty cups and ashtrays, food and food wrappers, plates the evidence of long hours of work taking place. The drain gin board contains canisters of weed killer and bags of sugar, the materials used to make explosives, and there are five litre plastic bottles with liquid in that is undergoing some process of transformation. A table is crammed with electrical equipment and tools, mostly ordinary domestic materials such as light switches, plugs, fuses, wire, insulating tape, cable connectors. There is a bomb makers manual open on the table. The verisimilitude is such that the viewer cannot avoid the feeling that they are trespassing in a place where an illegal activity is taking place. The viewer feels jumpy, as if they might be discovered by the perpetrators, who they feel might be dangerous. The effect of the installation is to show who close to daily life, how enmeshed in the everyday is the potential to kill.
Green also made several bombs complete but lacking explosive and detonators. These attracted the attention of the tabloid press and in some cases the gallery that exhibited was forced to remove them. One was a suitcase bomb, one was even a nuclear device, complete except for the plutonium.
Subsequently Green set up a pirate radio station and broadcast illegally to a free state that he had created.
!Green Renee.
American artist born in the 1960s, Green is known for her large scale interactive installations which have a socio-political genesis. In the late 1990s Green made an installation that filled a gallery with a maze like partition board structure consisting of a series of spaces, the walls painted different colours, sometimes plain, sometimes striped. Viewers walked through the structure, choosing to stop where they wished, their participation in what Green had presented invited. Videos are presented on monitors on the floor with bean bags and headphones strewn about. Written participation in a survey in invited. Photographs are on the walls. One space has sitting room furniture. One has a record collection and a record player. Overall the viewer enters a microcosmic world that represents daily life and is asked to consider and participate in activities that illustrate how identity is constructed and how it might be possible to think in new ways about its construction. 
!Greuze.
French painter, died.
!Grimonprez Johan.
Belgian artist who made a video work in the late 1990s D-I-A-L History. This projected film consists of vast amount of excerpted footage from newsreels, film and television that concerns terrorism, specifically the hijacking of an aeroplane. Grimonprez has edited this footage to make a short film that is a history of hijacking and the imagery that we have of such events. 
!Gris Juan.
French painter who was probably the first painter to use collage, an idea which was picked up by his contemporaries Picasso and Braque. Gris made a number of small paintings with collage and went to make Cubist paintings.
!Grosz George.
German artist who painted the decadence of the Weimar republic at the beginning of the twentieth century and the aftermath of war.
!Group Material. 
Toronto based group of artists/activists, producing collaborative works, solo works, publishing, running a gallery, and commissioning projects and books. Including among their number the painter Jochen Klein.
!Grunefeld Thomas.
German artist born in the 1950s known for his stuffed animal sculptures in which different parts of animals are combined to form one hybrid creature that could never exist. Grunefeld uses highly skilled taxidermists to renders these creatures objectively completely convincing as if they were the result of some kind of perverse genetic engineering project. The animals for example a rosters feet on a furry mammals body with the tail of a lizard, could have no imaginable purpose, thus they seem like contemporary fantastic beasts. 
!Grunewald Matthias. 
German medieval artist working around 1450 who is best known for a crucifixion scene. Grunewald is noted for the gritty realism of his paintings, extraordinary for the time, and for his use of colour. Grunewald did not shrink from depicting the horrors of medieval life, in a realistic way. 
!Gunning Lucy.
British artist born in the 1970s who made a video titled Climbing Round my Room (mid 1990s). Gunning negotiated the perimeter of her room without touching the floor, which involved climbing to the top of a wardrobe and balancing precariously on various items of furniture and using door handles and steps. The resulting video presented a re-articulation of an ordinary domestic space. 
!Gursky Andreas.
Swiss photographer who takes pictures of banal scenes in which the minute is contrasted with the gigantic, creating a formal image which becomes almost abstract in some cases. Gursky heightens this effect by manipulating the image in the darkroom, often altering the perspective so that the image reads as a flat picture plane rather than a representation of perspective. There is usually a repetitive pattern created by the presence in the images of a mass of something whether it be people, windows, etc. These effects are subtle and subversive.
Examples of Gursky's work from the 1990s include a container park at the port of Ferrara, where the bright colours of the containers form a patchwork pattern on the background of red soil and glowing pink light. The floor of a Siemens factory is a mainly white image with the black lines for the production line furniture and the bright colours for the electrical cable supplies creating a pattern, The Japanese stock exchange is a pattern in yellow and black added to by the white of the cascading tickets and the striped jackets of the trader. An expanse of plain carpet seems to be vast, skiers on slope are sticks of colour in a white space, a race course in Japan can be read a horizontal bands of colour, the display case in a Prada shoe shop is alive with glowing jewelled colour, a shopping centre is presented as bands of brass and greenery as the escalator travel down through the main atrium, a vast apartment block is a pattern of squares, a canal and dyke are horizontal stripes 
!Gussin Graham.
British artist born 1960s who makes drawings and sometimes installations. Around 1999 Gussin made a sound sensitive floor that made sounds in response to the viewers footsteps, producing a re-articulation of the viewers action in looking. Gussin made some drawings of the sound prouduced in this way using a computer programme that represented the sound waves as a perspective drawing.
!Guston Philip.
American painter born in the 1930s who made abstract expressionist work at the beginning of his career in the 1950s and early 60s. Guston had a crisis of belief in abstraction and began to paint figuratively. His began to be successful from this point, but was only really recognised much later, in the 1980s. Guston developed a distinctive personal iconography that included cigarette butts, ashtrays, horseshoes, shoes, and Klu Klux Klansmen's pointed hats, painted in a cartoon like style with heavy black outlines. The objects in particular can be seen as self portraits. Paintings include a pile of shoes, old and battered boots with the odd horseshoe, an ashtray overflowing with giant very fat cigarette butts, and a series of paintings of figures wearing Klansmen's hats the figures often facing each other as trying to converse. Guston typically used either a monochrome palette of grey brown black and white (for example in a painting of a pile of horseshoes), or a bright palette. His bright colours are blue, red and a fairly bright light pink, the pink often used as a background. Some of the Klansmen paintings are black on white. 
Guston depicts a lonely world not without a bleak humour, filled long hours in the studio smoking and trying to communicate with the rest of the world.
!Gygi Fabrice.
Swiss artist born in the 1960s who make installations. These consist of structures made from metal wood rubber and plastic, which apparently have practical function but in fact are difficult to decipher. The structures or groups of structures might fill a room. They have metal frames made from some kind of metal pole, put together using clamps and off the shelf heavy duty fixings. There might be a screen like structure, a bench like one, a platform. The frames might be filled in with plastic or rubber sheeting, hemmed and edged with large eyelets and then laced to the frame. A bench might have an upholstered top. The elements reference the gym, the club and seem to be an arena that implies sex and possibly violence. Yet they are benign mysterious objects that invite human interaction.

!Haacke Hans.
American artist who began working in the 1960s and became one of the best known of the 70s conceptual artists in America and Europe. His practise was political in the sense that his subject matter was the multinational corporation and advertising, which he believed to be the means by which corporations controlled their customers and the financial markets. 
Haacke made a number of installations consisting of text panels with photographs detailing the activities of multinational companies such as William Morris, often subverting advertising design used by the company.
Haacke's earlier sculptural work includes a piece called Condensation Cube (1965), a Plexiglas cube about 50cm square wit naturally occurring and accumulating droplets of condensation inside it.
!Hale Matthew.
British artist born in the 1960s who makes performance videos and assembled sculptures from household objects that hint at a performative action. Hale was one of the founders of City Racing an artist-run gallery in London in the 1990s.
!Hals Franz.
Dutch Eighteenth century painter notably of portraits, Hals painting The Laughing Cavalier, a portrait of a man in a large hat with a feather is instantly recognisable. 
!Hambling Maggie.
British artist who began painting portraits in the 1960s
!Hamilton Finlay Richard.
Scottish artist who since the 1970s has made and continues to make site specific outdoor installations. Hamilton Finlay carves text into stone panels and blocks, inscribed in simple classical fonts, single words and phrases that relate to landscape in which they are placed. His intention is to integrate words with landscape. These installations are sometimes small scale but may also be installed over a large area of land, such as in a park. The installation will often be permanent. Hamilton Finlay's work is probably best known as photographic documentation.
!Hamilton Richard.
British artist who was part of a group of pop artists in the 1960s. Hamilton made paintings and collages. His paintings are figurative and usually have a realistically painted element, perhaps a figure, with an abstract more painterly element, often blurry and watery, painted on un-primed or thinly primed canvas. Like many of the pop artists, Hamilton used many if the techniques of graphic art for example air brushing and photographic reproduction, in combination with oil painting. For example a painting of the IRA hunger striker Bobby Sands during the period of his dirty protest made in the 1970s show Sands in his prison cell, long haired and bearded, with the wall behind him smeared with his own excrement. Hamilton used an air brush to paint the excrement as blurry brown squiggles. Hamilton's collages are made as sketches for painting but sometimes presented as works in their own right such as the best known one, and arguably Hamilton's best known work, A Plan for Everyday Living which shows a montage of a modern domestic interior, an apartment with cantilevered stairs descending into a double height living area with picture windows, a body builder dressed only in a frilly apron vacuuming on the stairs. 
!Hammons David.
Artist whose work investigates cultural and ethnic identity.
!Hanson Duane.
American artist who began making his very well known life casts of people in the 1970s. Hanson's fibreglass casts of himself and others are sculptures equivalent of the photo realist painting. The casts are painted, have real hair added and are dressed to look as if they are real. They do indeed prompt a double take in the viewer. Hanson chose very ordinary subjects, for example a police officer, a museum attendant, a pair of overweight and badly dressed American tourists, a motorbike accident victim, prostrate with his bike, a cleaning woman. They are uncanny in their ability to fool the viewer.
!Hapaska Siobhan.
Irish artist born in 1965 who makes sculptures and installation. An early work was 8 identical life casts of a clothed young man, painted in buff colour, bearing a coffin. Made in 1990s this work seemed like a comment on the number of young men who were dying from AIDS related illnesses at that time. Also a vaguely heart shaped wall mounted 'speaker' constructed from teak veneer and purple felt, with a heartbeat sound playing from it. St Christopher Legless was included in a room sized installation featuring a fibreglass body cast or lifelike sculpture of the saint in rags and long black beard, sitting against the wall with amputated or cut off legs, an irony for this patron saint of travellers, or a cruel blow dealt to him deliberately. Echoes of kneecapping punishment in the conflict in northern Ireland. There was also a fibreglass sculpture of a motorbike, whose contours and mechanics had been smoothed out and filled in so that the whole bike turned into a kind of futuristic vehicle, that did indeed echo the sculptures of Boccioni but also somehow of Rodin. Sprayed a pearlescent white and highly polished. Also a large bedlike structure, a futuristic sleeping platform made from shiny white lacquered fibreglass, the platform with ergonomic curved base, with a slit running all round the inset mattress area, from which water was pumped and ran over the sides of the base in a constant water curtain. The mattress of shaggy fur, with a harness and headphones suggesting that one could strap oneself in and be transported, not literally but mentally, by the comfort and the sound and the trickling water. The bed like the motorbike, seemed to come from science fiction.
!Haring Keith.
American artist, now dead, who began as a graffiti artist in the early 1980s in New York. Haring developed a distinctive graphic style, using bold lines to outline his figures, animals and symbols, and filling them in with plain flat colour. Once he became known Haring began to make his work on canvas and made a lot of printed works, books and ultimately merchandise. Today Haring's work is very recognisable. He used a simple lexicon of symbols and figures, always outlining them in black and filling the background in with small marks. Hearts, hands, and figures, much simplified, often appear. The figures usually in active poses, rarely have features. One of his best known images is of a red heart on a yellow background, the heart surrounded by lines as if to indicate that it is beating. He most often used the colours primary yellow and red, and black.
Haring made a lot of political posters about AIDS, and his instantly recognisable graphic style was particularly suited to campaigning on various issues. 
!Harris Dereck.
British painter born in the 1960s who makes paintings of details of sportsmen and women, much enlarged, from photographs. 
!Harris Louise.
British artist born in the 1960s who made installations and sculpture in the 1990s from wool and other textile materials.
!Harris Mark.
British artist born around 1960 who makes conceptual work.
!Harrison David.
British artist born in the 1950s who makes autobiographical sculpture, paintings and drawings. Harrison's work has a naïve quality, the paintings are small, around 60 cm high, and sometimes awkwardly painted. The drawings are made in pencil. In his early work in the 1980s Harrison concentrated almost exclusively on painting cats with a highly stylised 50s appearance. Later Harrison began to describe his own life and lives like his more literally in terms of encounters with people, animals and landscape. For example, several paintings feature a caravan in a rural setting, and include the name of a purported guest to the caravan in the title, for example British footballer Paul Gascoigne. In some of the caravan paintings a mysterious white rabbit hovers, ghost like, as if it represents the spirit of something. 
Harrison's sculptures are assemblages of objects to resemble animals, in the spirit of Picasso. Forks, table legs and any kind of discarded objects are given new roles as the legs of a heron, a birds beak. The sculptures junk like appearance belies their accurate resemblance to the animal they represent. 
!Harvey Marcus.
Marcus Harvey is a British painter born in the 1970s who is interested in using paint and its application to produce a hidden image, or conversely to produce an image by an unusual means of application of paint. Harvey made a series of works in the 1990s which on first inspection appear to be abstract paintings with lots of impasto and brushstrokes. In fact superimposed are outlines of women taken from pornographic images painted in thin black lines which merge into the abstraction. Once recognised, however the images are very clear. 
In 1999 Harvey made a painting of Myra Hindley a convicted child murderer still serving her sentence at the time which became notorious. Harvey made the 10meter high portrait, taken from the police mug shot made famous by the constant press interest in the story, from the handprints of children. The handprints in varying shades from white to dark grey form a kind of pixel effect, creating and image that only appears in full detail from distance, much like the effect of a billboard poster
!Hasewaga Jun.
Korean artist working in Britain, born in the 1970s. Hasewaga makes paintings of people which are done on board, in shiny gloss paint with solid outlines, and then cut out.
!Hatoum Mona.
British artist born in the 1950s in a middle eastern country, who makes installation and video work. Hatoum's work investigates the extremes of human nature and cruelty, alluding to the repressive practises of certain regimes in the middle east and their effect on the life of women in particular. An early video work shows the veiled face of a woman with the shadows of Arabic text falling across her face. At a certain point a knife is drawn across her eyes as if to cut them open.
A later installation consists of a long totally dark corridor constructed within a gallery, at the end of which is dimly visible a red glow. The curious viewer will walk along the corridor and the glow becomes brighter, revealing itself to be several vertical bars of red light. Only at close proximity does it become apparent that the light source is electric heater elements. The effect of this is palpable, the viewer has the sense that they might burn themselves, that the red hot bars have somehow lured them towards them.
Another installation that uses a similar economy of means consists of three banks of wire mesh lockers, arranged to create a 'room'. Hanging from the ceiling is an unshaded electric light bulb which slowly descends and rises into and out of the locker space. The shadows cast by the wire gridded construction of the lockers grow large and shrink in the most sinister fashion. In the late 1990s Hatoum moved on from the almost theatrical effects created by these installations to create more video work. In a video installation called Deep Throat displayed in a wooden kiosk, Hatoum showed a film made by a medical camera travelling through the various orifices of a woman's body. Like all her work the visceral impact of this work leads to secondary reflections on imprisonment and torture.
!Head Tim.
British artist born around 1950, since the late 1970s Head has made work in a variety of media. He has often focussed on generic and graphic imagery which he has abstracted and reconstructed in various ways, both as sculptural form, painting and works on paper. In the 2000s Head began to work digital animations, using the pixels that usually constitute the image of video and manipulating their colours to create abstract colour fields of constantly changing coloured squares. These are projected very large, and make immediate visual connection with pointillism and with the dot matrix printing process made familiar by advertising hoardings. Head has created a moving abstract work from pixels, literally the stuff that images are now made from. 
!Heilman Mary.
Abstract painter born in the 1940s, Heilman makes small paintings of carefully considered abstract shapes, lines and forms exploring endless possibilities of form and colour.
!Hemsworth Gerard.
British painter (born 1940s) who has taken generic graphic forms and visual jokes as his subject matter. Hemsworth's paintings are made with entirely flat smooth colour and hard edged lines. Typically he will choose one or several diagrammatic representations, such as a cloud, a rabbit or a vase for example, simplify this to the minimum number of lines required and paint it on the canvas in black. 
!Hepworth Barbara.
British sculptor who began working in the 1940s and made the work for which she is best known in the 50s and 60s. Hepworth spent most of her working life in the artists colony of St. Ives in Cornwall, south west England, along with Ben Nicholson and others. She was also a contemporary of Henry Moore.
Hepworth worked in stone, wood and metal, as well as making working drawings. Her sculptures were smooth often oval forms, which often had holes (or voids) through them. The voids might be spanned by string or wires strung across in parallel lines or fanning out like spokes, as if to create some kind of tension in the object. She favoured black or white marble, granite or wood, highly polishes, or bronze which would be polished to a high gold shine. Many of her sculptures were worked out in plaster.
The sculptures ranged from small table sized ones, for example three perfectly smooth elliptical forms on a shallow plinth, all made of white marble, or an elongated bronze shape standing on its end, to medium sized plinth based works such as the stringed elliptical voids, to large outdoor sculptures that sat on the ground, on stone boulders, or bronze plinths. Hepworth tended to make the plinths for her work from the same material as the sculpture itself.
Hepworth made several large scale public commissions and her work can be seen in London on the façade of John Lewis department store, in various public parks for example on Hampstead Heath and in Battersea Park, and most famously towering over the piazza of the United Nations building in New York. In most cases these works featured an oval shape often with strings, either in stone or bronze. For the UN building she made a large oval flat shape with a small hole through it, reminiscent of a standing stone standing on its end next to an ornamental water feature.
In fact the standing stone and other stone age monuments and monoliths were part of her inspiration, surrounded as she was by them in Cornwall. Hepworth wanted her sculptures to sit in the landscape in the same way. 
!Hesse Eva.
American artist born in the 1940s died in 1969. Hesse's prodigious output seen as an important counterpoint to the prevailing, new and radical minimal sculpture of the time, and as a way point for women artists who were in the minority, particularly in this field. Hesse combined current sculptural preoccupations with unorthodox, and traditionally feminine materials and methods. Her achievement was recognised very early and she was included in several seminal exhibitions including one curated by Lucy Lippard which defined the new work. 
Hesse began her career around 1960 as a painter, training under ??. She made figurative paintings and self portraits, gradually turning to abstraction, until she had a crisis of confidence in her ability to paint. Hesse ceased to make work until she and her husband travelled to Dusseldorf where a German industrialist collector had offered them a studio residency in a disused factory that he owned. There she found an abundance of materials and machine parts lying around, and she began to draw these parts and experiment. Working in the factory Hesse produced a number of odd abstract drawings based on the machine parts, and began to make wall based three dimensional paintings, modelling the surface of the work and adding string following the shapes, as well as projecting elements, the whole painted. She then began to make sculptures with the materials she found on the factory floor, and her first successful ones were cubes of steel mesh sheets, open on one side. Hesse pushed equal lengths of  rubber tubing through the holes in the mesh in the manner of rug tufting, to create a furry effect on the interior of the box. This painstaking task produced 2 sculptures (one with black tubing, one with transparent tubing) which combined the (traditionally female) techniques of handcraft with those (traditionally male) of industrial fabrication used to make minimal sculpture. Hesse continued to make wall reliefs from modelling materials, string and paint including Rosy, a breast like form on a buff coloured round with a spiral of string painted in graduated shades from pink to red. Hesse's interest in concentric circles was worked in these reliefs and in her Dot graph paper drawings, delicate pencil or pen drawings in which rectangles are filled with row of tiny small circles or rows of concentric circles coloured in with pencil. 
The string forms resulted in a wall work consisting of a row of about 25 hemispheres 30cm in diameter covered with string spiralling round, placed in a horizontal line on a long strip about 40cm wide, at picture height on the wall. From the centre of each hemisphere cords project and extend to the floor where the ends lie. The whole is painted grey.
Hang up (1967) is a seminal work by Hesse. It consists of a 2m by 1.5m empty frame on the wall, bound with cloth bandage and painted light grey. Form the frame projects a heavy gauge wire also wrapped with cloth bandage attached on the bottom right and top left corners and looping out about 2 m form the wall and back again. The viewer may stand inside the loop, in which case they are seen to be lassoed by the work. This work is an abstract but concrete representation of the nature of looking at paintings.
String was one of Hesse's favoured materials along with latex and fibreglass. She made a string mess consisting of length of cord dipped in latex and strung from the ceiling to form an abject enlarged untidy web. She took net shopping bag and stuffed them with scrunched up plastic sheeting, hanging them in clusters which are strangely anthropomorphic, on the wall. She photographed herself lying on a bed covered with a mass of string like spaghetti. 
Hesse also used rubber tubing which she filled with plaster to create sausage like forms. Her work often made allusion to the male and the female body. 
The preoccupation with tubular forms and repetition characterises Hesse's later works, Accession and Accretion. Accession consists of two black 50cm square panels mounted on the wall with a space between them with a mass of silver wires running between them. Accretion is a row of 1.5m long fibreglass tubes, slightly crumpled, leaning against wall placed at regular intervals.
Similar works are a casual arrangement of caved in fibreglass cylinders about 70cm high and 50 cm wide standing on their ends on the floor, and rows of latex spheres on a sheet.
Hesse died prematurely of a brain tumour.
!Higgs Matthew.
British curator and artist born in the early 60s who makes works on paper. Higgs's dry witty conceptual work re-presents book covers, pages from books and titles, making plays on words and puns. He will often make a text work in which a book, or a title is transformed by minimal intervention into a reference to the visual. One series of works involved obliterating all the words on a page except the words 'There is a painting on the wall' and placing this framed page next to a painting by another artist. 
Higgs also made an artists publication series called Imprint 93 (from 1993 onwards) for which he invited  artist to make a small pamphlet. This activity bridges his practise as an artists and his work as a curator.
!Hiller Susan.
British artist born in the 1950s, Hiller makes installations usually using video often projected, works on paper and often three dimensional objects and structures. She is interested myth, religion, ritual, literature, grand narrative, and psychoanalysis. Belshazzar's Feast made in the late 80s takes the biblical reference of its title as a starting point for one work. A sitting room 'set' with sofas, coffee table, lamps and sideboard contains a television where the fireplace would be. On the television is a film of showing a burning fire, as if to illustrate that TV is the hearth around which we gather. On the wall is automatic writing (a reference to the writing on the wall by the unseen hand that takes place at Belshazzar's Feast) done by Hiller.
Another work features giant shadow puppets of Punch and Judy and other folkloric characters, made into a film projected to cover all four walls of a gallery space. The silhouetted characters are looming and distorted. 
Hiller made a site specific work at the Freud Museum in London (the home of Sigmund Freud). She presented a series of cardboard boxes containing text and objects, and also made photographs of Freud's ethnographic collection.
!Hilliard John.
British artist who makes photographs of landscape and architecture, presented on wall mounted light boxes. 
!Hiorns, Roger.
!Hirschorn Thomas.
German artist born around 1960 who makes large scale environments and installations. Hirschorn's work evolves from a life as art philosophy that leads him to create environments and make related publications. He uses found imagery, and all manner of materials in his work, building large architectural structures in a homemade way, using cardboard, silver foil, plastic bags, and any number of other found items and materials. 
!Hirst Damien.
British artist born in the early 1960s who the best known contemporary artists in Britain when he exhibited a shark preserved in formaldehyde in a glass tank titled The Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living. 
Hirst is considered to have been the impetus fro a generation of British artists known as the Young British Artists (abbreviated to YBAs) because he curated an exhibition in an empty warehouse title Freeze. This featured his contemporaries (they were all still students) at a time when it was nearly impossible fro young artist to exhibit their work in London galleries. The term YBAs went on to become the collective name for all of Hirst's generation, including Jake and Dinos Chapman, Tracy Emin, and Sarah Lucas. 
Hirst's work was purchased by a London Collector and advertising executive Charles Saatchi, who financed the shark and subsequent formaldehyde works. Saatchi had the only gallery in London at the time big enough to exhibit these works. 
Hirst made a number of formaldehyde works including a cow and her calf sliced right through into two vertical halves, exhibited in a tow pairs of tanks so that the viewer could walk throng the centre of the cow and a sheep. He also made a work consisting of a glass wall case filled with rows of fish of different species preserved by taxidermy, all facing the same way (Fish Swimming in the Same Direction)
Hirst has made many paintings which fall into three series, the spin paintings (done on a circular canvas spinning horizontally which has multicoloured gloss paint thrown at it), the spot paintings (multicoloured gloss paint spots on white arranged in rows) and the butterfly paintings. The first butterfly paintings were canvases covered with gloss paint in plain colours in the surface of which adhered many different types of butterfly. Most recently Hirst has been covering the canvas entirely with the wings of butterflies, arranged in geometric patterns. Hirst's paintings are made by assistants to his instructions and produced in large numbers. The spot paintings have become Hirst's logo, and these signature spots adorned first the restaurant that Hirst opening with Charles Saatchi in London, The Pharmacy, then a Thames riverboat which takes visitors between the two Tate galleries, and finally an unmanned space vehicle which has been sent to Mars.
Life and death are the major preoccupations of Hirst's work made evident by his use of  formaldehyde, insects, and medical drugs. 
Following his work with butterflies, Hirst used flies; a cows head was placed inside a 3m high glass tank, and maggots were allowed to breed in it. These turned into flies, which could fly around inside the tank and an interconnected one in which there was a desk and a chair. The flies eventually having lived their entire lives in the sealed tank. 
Medical drugs are used by Hirst to represent both life and death and he has made several works using bottles, cartons, boxes, tubes, and other containers of drugs. These are arranged in glass wall cases their predominantly white packaging with blocks of a huge variety of colours giving a particular visual effect when seen in the context of a gallery. Hirst made a room sized installation titled Pharmacy which contained these case on all the walls as well as some of the oversized red green and blue coloured glass decanters that are seen in pharmacists windows. 
Hirst also made a feature film with many of his friends as actors, shot on 35mm with high production values. In 2003 Hirst continues to make formaldehyde works, for example glass tanks containing animals heads with knives plunged into them, or with blood spattered on the wall around them.
Damien Hirst's work is often lampooned by the national press in cartoons.
!Hitchens Ivon.
British painter working  from the 1940s onwards, died in the 1980s. Hitchens painted landscapes and vegetation and flowers with loose flowing brushstrokes leaving parts of the canvas unpainted. He favoured subdued earth colours, purples, blues and greens. Hitchens often used an unconventional panorama format canvas.
!Hobbypop.
Group of German and British artists who work collaboratively. Hobbypop are based in London. Their paintings are often installed both on the wall and propped at angles in the centre of a gallery space. The group also initiates events including guided walks, and theatrical performances.
!Hoberman Niki.
British artist born in the 1960s who makes large (up to 3m high) paintings of children. These are done from photographs taken by the artist of children she meets. They are painted as if there is a strange often green or blueish light cast upon them. The children have exaggerated features and seem to exist in some other world. There is something sinister yet saccharine about the children. Hoberman applies paint smoothly and thinly, soften out all brushstrokes. 
!Hockney David.
One of the best known of all British twentieth artists. Hockney was born in the 1940s and began his career in the 1960s, being successful while he was still at college. His paintings are figurative, at this early stage he often added text as in a work titled We Two Boys Together Swinging with the title in the painting in white letters.
 Hockney made a painting called The Bigger Splash which is instantly familiar. It shows an empty swimming pool and diving board with a villa in the background. Hockney uses acrylic paint and the pools is rendered in flat aquamarine. There is a splash in the water as if someone had just dived in, painted in white paint, perhaps one of the best representations of a splash in the history of painting. Hockney went to live in Los Angeles and the swimming pool became his favourite subject. He became very good at painting water and also painted in water colour on tiled sheets of watercolour paper. He continues to paint in watercolour in 2003, perversely making large scale full length portraits in this apparently unsuitable medium. 
Drawings constitute a major part of Hockney's oeuvre. He used a single confident line, pencil or pen, and also made a number of lithographs and etchings. His drawings are restrained and monochrome in comparison to his often bright paintings. He drew his friends and lovers incessantly, and his mother, as well as still lives, flowers, landscapes, and animals, in particular cats and dogs. In fact Hockney's work is extremely traditional in terms of his subject matter, it was the means of execution that attracted attention to him.
Another well known painting by Hockney is Mrs and Mrs Clarke at Home, a double portrait of Ossie and Celia Clarke, fashion designer friends of Hockney's, seated on opposites of a bay window in their London home, a cat next to them.
Hockney also designed a number of stage productions fro opera companies, notably the Magic Flute and The Rakes Progress. He painted backdrops and flys, as well as designing costumes. 
!Hodgkin Howard.
British painter born in the 1940s who makes abstract paintings. Hodgkin uses very bright jewel like colours, applied in large often round repeated splodges, the paint continuing right off the edge of the canvas onto and round the frame. Hodgkin's paintings are never larger than2 metres high. He sometimes uses round and oval shaped canvases. Hodgkin has made work for public commission including the massively enlarged photomural of brushstrokes that fills the windows of the circular Imax cinema in London. 
!Hofer Candida.
Photographer born around 1960 who has photographed zoos, libraries and various other institutions. Her images often show glamorous ornate surroundings yet have a cool restrained atmosphere. 
!Hogarth William.
British artist and satirist, Hogarth documented eighteenth century London life in his highly detailed drawings and engravings. His series of engravings of Bedlam the notorious London hospital for the insane are famous for their accurate depiction of a horrific place few had seen. Hogarth's portrayal of English daily life is invaluable for historians. 
!Hokusai.
Japanese eighteenth century artist who is best known for his painting The Wave which shows a towering wave with a foamy crest about to crash down on the surrounding sea. Hokusai worked in traditional style but his subject matter was innovative. He used pen ink and pigment on paper.
!Holbein.
English artist working during the reign of Elizabeth the first. Like all artists of the time Holbein largely painted to commission, recording the members of and activities of the royal Court. He made several distinctive standing portraits of the Queen including one in which she is wearing a white embroidered dress decorated with pearls, of her father Henry VIII, and many other people, usually between 50cm and one metre high. He also painted Sir Thomas More. The Ambassadors is a very well known Holbein. This painting shows two bearded ambassadors dressed in doublet and hose with cloaks edged with ermine and hats, standing either side of a sideboard and table. On the furniture are casually arranges various items, tropes, that represent elements of learning and knowledge which are prerequisite to public life. Some of these are obvious, like the globe and compasses, the bible, others more obscure to us today. In the centre of the painting is a curious trompe l'oeil feature. Invisible to the viewer standing in front of the painting but for a smear like element, viewed from a specified angle a skull can be seen. It is speculated that Holbein merely wanted to display his virtuosity, or that the painting was intended to be hung on a stairway where it would be reliably encountered at the requisite angle. 
!Holzer Jenny.
American artist born in the 1950s who works in a variety of media using text. During the 1980s Holzer made a series of works featuring popular sayings slightly altered that she titled Truisms. These political statements subverted commonly used truisms to make points about consumerism, subjectivity and art. The Truisms featured on T shirts, Till receipts in shops, park benches, digital display boards about Times Square and Piccadilly Circus, LED displays in public places, posters and leaflets. Holzer employed the various methods of public display and dissemination of information for the presentation of her work. Holzer was a contemporary of Barbara Kruger.  
!Home Stewart. 
British artist and writer has written about punk, art and performance, including writing and photographing a performer known as Cosey Fanni Tutti. Home has also made work on paper and installation, such as the Art Bed, an ordinary single bed with a bedspread on it on which the viewer is invited to recline. Homes' subject is art itself. 
!Hopkins, Georgie.
British artist born in the late 1960s. 
!Hopper Edward.
American artist who worked from the 1940s to the 1970s. Now dead. Hopper painted American life, mostly but not all urban scenes. He was particularly good at painting night scenes. His painting showing a bar at night is very well known. The bar is long and low, green on the outside with mostly black on the canvas, but glowing with bright yellow light from its interior. Inside is a woman waitress and a few solitary male customers. Another painting shows a petrol station at night, another a truck on a lonely road stopped by a payphone, caught in the headlights of an oncoming car. Hopper seems to depict a melancholy loneliness that he found in modern life. His paintings are extremely popular. They are painted in a realistic yet painterly way.
!Horn Rebecca.
Artist born in the 1950s who makes sculptures that are largely concerned with the human body. Horn's work is often presented as installations and she sometimes makes kinetic work. An example of this is apiece called The Conductor which is a white non-sighted persons stick suspended in space over a metal plate. An invisible magnetic field causes the stick to dance spasmodically, making a tapping and scraping sound when it touches the metal plate, as if it were wielded by an invisible person. This is quite threatening for the viewer. A piano hangs from ceiling, its insides exploding out periodically, catching the viewer unaware as the lid springs open and all the strings sound and the hammers slide out.
Another work consists of a large number of hoses strewn over a whole exhibition space, all leading to something which is operated by an air bladder. The hoses are full of compressed air and the whole operation seems to be random. 
A work which is visually similar to this is a dressmakers dummy holding a dress made from transparent tubing which is full of red liquid, which is pumped around the dress as if the tubes were an arterial system. 
Horn has also made a dress, again displayed on a dummy, from large pieces of meat sewn together. 
Much of Horn's work involves the construction of strange garments, such as the gloves with 50 cm long pointed finger extensions. She often makes work which impedes and transforms the function of the body, or places its inner workings on the outside. Her work has a fairy tale atmosphere that is quite frightening. 
!Horn Roni.
American artist working from the 1980s onwards. 
!Houshiary Shiraz.
British artist who makes sculptures, often of metal, that make reference to Islamic architecture. The surfaces of the sculptures are often etched with Arabic text and Islamic patterning. 
!Howell Kate.
American video artist born in the 1960s. 
!Howson Peter.
Brigit artist who makes paintings and drawings, who went to several war zones as a war artist.
!Hoyland John.
British painter who makes figurative paintings.
!Huebler Douglas.
Canadian conceptual artist.
!Hughes Des.
British artist born in the 1970s who makes resin cast sculptures of junk. For example Hughes might model old nails in clay and cast them, painting them to look exactly like the real thing.
!Hugonnier Marine.
French artist who made a film over several months spent in Afghanistan.
!Hume Gary.
British artist who has represented Britain at the Venice Biennale. Hume is one a group of artists known as Young Births Artists or YBAs who emerged in the early 90s. Hume began his career making paintings from hospital doors which he painted all over with white or cream coloured gloss paint. In fact gloss household paint has become Hume's trademark and he never uses anything else. Hume went on to make figurative paintings mostly portraits in which he vastly simplified the elements of a face, so that it consisted of one or two areas of colour and no features. The paint was poured on, allowed to dry, and then the next colour added. The edge of the dry part acts as a barrier to the next colour. 
Hume painted the model Kate Moss, a virgin Mary and other images taken from famous paintings, and a baby. He featured plants, and vague interiors, but all in his vastly simplified blocks of shiny colour. The paintings nearly resist interpretation which is Hume's intention.  
Hume made a video in which he portrays himself as King Canute. Around 2000 he began to make sculptures, bronze snowmen, very smoothed out shapes painted in shiny pale colours. 
!Huttner Per.
Swedish artist who make socially inclusive work in which he often invites people to participate. 
!Huwys, Bethan.
Welsh artist who makes very small scale sculptures from natural materials. 
!Huyghe Pierre.
Swiss artist who makes photographs and videos. A photograph of his shows a stone frozen in mid air over a motorway. The stone looks like a boulder implying impending tragedy as it will surely cause a terrible accident, until the viewer realises that it is a tiny pebble that has been photographed as it drops from a bridge over the speeding cars. 

!Ichige Yasu.
Japanese artist living in London, Ichige makes videos usually featuring himself. In one he places a car directly in front of a wall and puts his foot on the accelerator, driving into the wall without moving until the tyres catch fire and the engine gives up. Another shows Ichige enter an amusement arcade dressed in full racing driver gear. He sits in a seat in front of a racing game and plays the game, winning the race without dropping any points. We see the game form his point of view. 
!Immendorf Jorges.
German artist whose career began in the 1970s, Immendorf achieved success in the 1980s with his figurative expressionist German twentieth century history paintings often featuring the eagle of the third Reich, nightclub and café scenes and musicians. Immendorf's earlier work had been performative. He invented a concept called Lidl, which consisted of an imaginary town and once trailed a brick with the world Lidl on it in and out of shops. Immendorf got arrested by the police a few times for these activities.
!Ingres.
French nineteenth century painter who made a painting of a seated nude which is known all over the world. Ingres showed the woman seated on a bed with her back to the viewer, a white sheet draped round her hips, and a red patterned scarf wound round her head, the face just visible in profile. It has been remarked that that drawing of the figure is anatomically inaccurate and that if the woman were to stand up her body would be very out of proportion. 
!Innes Callum.
Born in the 60s Innes 90s works a series of views of London, mainly rooftops and other banal cityscapes painted entirely in white relying on brush marks and texture to render the image. 
!Inventory.
British artist group who make socially engaged and political work and publish a journal, Inventory. Inventory's work usually consist of installations, usually some kind of stand or kiosk like structure, then a variety of photographic and text works. They take the position of proselytisers for a new way of life, highlight the dystopian elements in everyday life and imagining collective actions. An example is a photo collage of London  in 2002 showing the city as if it were about to collapse. Inventory have spray painted anti-American slogans on the walls of a museum in which they were invited to show. 
!Irvin Bert.
British painter born in the 1930s who made large abstract paintings usually by pouring very brightly coloured paint onto a white ground, sometimes only a few stripes of red yellow, green and blue paint across the bottom corners of a canvas, for example
!Iserman Jim.
American artist who makes multicoloured tapestry quilts and cubes. The tapestries hand stitched in repeated geometric patterns.
!Islam Runa.
twentieth century artist who makes films that are concerned with ethnicity.
!Jackson Vanessa.
British artist born around 1950 who makes abstract paintings.
!Jankowski Christian.
German artist born in the 1970s who makes video, installation and sound work. In Bank, Jankowski hired a security guards to keep people out of a empty disused bank, the result of which was that people wanted to enter a space they ordinarily would have ignored. In another work Jankoswki recorded a board meeting at a national art museum, and then got children to speak the transcript. Because the children had no understanding of the issues discussed they gave the transcript an entirely new and rather odd emphasis. Jankowski often uses actors. In another work he asks actors to record the reading of the extended email correspondence between himself and his girlfriend when they were apart for several months. Again he was interested in the different inflexion and emphases given to the transcript. Jankoswki is interested in what happens if slight subversions are made to everyday materials and locations. 
!Jeffries Neil.
British artist who has made folded and bent sheet metal sculptures from the 1980s onwards. These are figurative, including people vehicles and have a toy like, mad inventor quality. The sculptures are painted.
!Joffe Chantal.
British artist born in the 1960s, Joffe paints children and women in loose expressive style. Her paintings are usually very small, no more that 20 or 30 cm high, made on board with oil paint. She uses photographs as her source. Joffe often exhibits groups of paintings together arranged in a line or on a grid pattern. 

!John Gwen.
British nineteenth century painter, John painted mostly portraits, using a sombre palette. 
!Johns Jasper.
1960s on. American flag paintings are the work he is best known for. In 1960s Johns painted the American flag actual size. This was the first time anyone had used the flag as an image and johns made it into an abstract painting, the flag as abstraction going right to edge of canvas, rather that a painting of a flag. At the time the flag was being burned in protest at Vietnam war? He went on to make a proliferation of flag paintings drawings and lithographs initially red white and blue but then he began changing the colours culminating in a series of white on white flags and even an edition of bronze flag table sculptures. Johns also painted the numbers one to ten and the alphabet, using stencils to draw the shapes.
!Jonas Joan.
American performance artist and musician 70s also worked with Judson church dancers Yvonne Rainer and Merce Cunningham a performance with a cello. 
!Jones Alison.
British figurative painter who began working in the 80s and 90s. at the beginning of 2000 Jones began to make site specific installations by painting directly on walls using projections of shadows (for example of people who might inhabit the room - someone on their hands and knees vomiting, or a cleaner going about their work, painted in flat black silhouette) and by wallpapering architecturally complex sections of the interiors of buildings using multicoloured striped wallpaper.  
!Jones Allen.
British artist born in the 1940s, Jones achieved notoriety in the 1960s and 70s for his sculptures of women as furniture. Feminists in particular found his work hard to accept and he fell from popularity during the 1980s. Jones continues to make his work, the images of some of his sculptures are known all over the world. 
Jones' sculptures are made by taking body casts of women. These are cast in fibreglass, spray painted realistically and other materials added. The sculptures are very beautifully made. A characteristic work is a coffee table - A glass top is placed on the back of a kneeling woman who is wearing a basque, stockings and suspenders and extremely high heels. The clothes and shoes are real. Other furniture includes a similar table top placed on the shins of a woman lying on her back with her legs bent at hip and knee, shins parallel to the floor and bound with cords to form a 'z' shaped support. 
Jones explored the idea of woman as support creating stools (a woman crouched over and bound with an specially made upholstered leather seat strapped on to her back, for example) and other kinds of furniture as well as paintings. The women are rarely depicted without sex shop lingerie, vertiginous heels and a lot of makeup. They always have perfect figures, in short they are images from pornography. The sadistic quality and implications of Jones' work did not endear him to generations of women in the 70s and 80s although his work was enduringly popular. Jones himself refuted any criticism and rarely acceded to the demands to justify his work.  
!Jones Gareth.
British sculptor, formerly a critic and curator, Jones makes singular and highly crafted objects, a red yellow and blue cube with one side missing, a paint handkerchief made by painting several layers of white paint onto a handkerchief and peeling off the paint, a peacock feather stuck into a wall, works using unspoiled cassette tape, stainless steel minimal box floor pieces, a series of plinths made of different materials, some with words on, commenting on the display of art and turning the plinth in art object, a cape made of raffle tickets, works using LP covers, drawing pins, tape, and architectural model-like constructions. Often a homage to a musician, for example David bowie.
!Jones Sarah.
British artist who makes hard edged abstract pattern paintings that take the facades of modern buildings as her subject. She minimises the detail in these and produces brightly coloured grids which have a perspective to them, the grid is in white. The high gloss paint is meticulously neatly applied. 
!Jones Zebedee.
British painter born in the 1970s who makes abstract paintings by putting a vast quantity of very thick oil paint in a single on a canvas (usually under one metre high) and spreading it across the canvas leaving the brush marks readily visible. His paintings are really no more than thick layers of paint and as such they draw attention to the physicality of painting.
!Jorn Asger.
Dutch artist and member of the Situationists. Jorn made collages with torn posters, for example a sixteenth century portrait of a woman in a blue brocade dress has the face defaced by the additions of some paint and a collaged element. 
!Joy Clair.
British painter born in around 1960 who painted skies with clouds in the 1980s. Joys work has subsequently become pattern based.
Judd Ben
British artist born around 1970 who takes photographs that allude to glamour photography, using amateur techniques such as Vaseline on the camera lens. In 2002 he began making short video films that show groups of people involved in photo shoots and film making watching the actors and models, who are never shown. Judd's work thus becomes a study of the viewers, of vicarious pleasures, revealing these men in their absorption.
!Judd Donald.
American artist born in the 1940s Donald Judd became one of the most significant minimal sculptors in the world during the 1960s and 70s. He makes steel boxes, shelf life structures, and repeated units, fabricated with a high attention to detail and immaculately spray painted in a variety of colours. Some sculptures are made of polished metal such as brass, so that they are extremely shiny The structures and units are ambiguous, both suggesting function but obviously non-functional. They are either mounted on the wall, in a horizontal line or one above the other, sometimes in ascending sizes, or placed with precision on the floor. He used metal folding machines with virtuosity, and the I Beam is a favourite material.
Judd brought the qualities of steel fabrication and the modular construction of modernism to his sculptures, simple works that often had a monumental quality.
Judd set up a studio and a foundation in Marfa, Texas, where he has a number of assistants working. He is extremely prolific. 
!Julien Isaac.
British artist who makes films, usually presented in two or threes screen forma. Julien uses 35 mm film and projects his films in especially exhibition spaces. He is interested in masculine identity and sexual and ethnic specificity. His films have a still, dream like quality, with high production values. 

!Kabakov Ilya and his wife.
Russian artist who has made a large number of installations working in partnership with his wife. His work comments on Russian (both Soviet and post-soviet) social order, and on the position of the individual in a totalitarian society. The Kabakov's work is often optimistic and engenders a feeling of the possibility of escape in the viewer. It often has a didactic quality.
A work made in the late 1980s consists of a bedroom constructed inside a gallery space, the structural walls entirely freestanding so that the viewer is presented with a wooden box. Through the open door the viewer can see into the room which is full of books and comic books and magazines, a bed and some rudimentary furniture. A life size realistic dummy of a aircraft pilot who has apparently ejected from a plane has parachuted through the ceiling, bring the ceiling down and spreading rubble over the tiny room. The pilot is suspended, his parachute harness caught in the roof.
The Kabakov's also made a very large scale installation based on Vladimir Tatlin's tower, a spiral construction. This installation consists of the tower, and several interlinked spaces with doors and windows, the whole roughly constructed of unpainted light coloured wood. Viewers enter the structure and negotiate the spaces, eventually climbing to the top of the tower on its helter skelter like steps. At the top of the tower and in the rooms are various objects, images and texts to contemplate, often placed on school desks. There is quite a lot to read. The installation is a kind of maze. 
!Kahlo Frida.
Mexican artist born in 1920s who made figurative paintings, largely self portraits. Kahlo depicted her somewhat tragic life in her paintings, which are graphc and detailed. She shows herself in many guises, with her distinguishing eyebrows which meet in the middle, and her long braided hair and native Mexican dress. She details her gynaecological problems and back problems stemming from a trolley bus accident as a young girl (which eventually took her life prematurely in the 1950s) in her paintings. In particular a number of miscarriages (she shows the foetus outside her womb, still attached by the umbilical cord, for example) and also the restraining corset which she wore to support her spine in her last years. Kahlo's discomfort and anger at her body's inability to fulfil its biological destiny, coupled with a feminist fury at the obstacles faced by a woman trying to succeed as a serious painter at that time, also feed into her work. Kahlo's paintings are disturbing, often horrific but she adds to this her bright colours, her love of pattern and beauty. 
Kahlo lived with the Mexican muralist Diego Rivera for part of her life. 
!Kalf.
seventeenth century painter. Kalf mainly painted still life, one example is a painting of a suit of armour cast onto a chair by a table covered with gold goblets and plates, the whole an array of luxurious things, painted with great facility to create a glow from the candle light reflected in the gold and bronze items. 
!Kandinsky Wassily.
Turn of the century Russian artist who is known for making some the earliest abstract expressionist painting. Kandinsky used bright colours and black on a white ground to make gestural flowing marks. He was interested in the relation of music to sound and some of his paintings are attempts to 'paint' music. Kandinsky was part of Die Brucke, the German artists group founded by Ernst Kirchner. He made some stage backdrops for experimental orchestral works.
!Kane Alan.
British artist who worked with Jeremy Deller on a work called the Folk Archive, a collection of British folk and craft objects.
!Kapoor Anish.
British artist who began in the late 1970s to make works using pigment. Kapoor was first known for his varying shaped piles of very bright and densely coloured pure pigment. These were arranged on the floor of the gallery. Kapoor then began to make spherical and other shaped structures that he placed on the floor and attached to the wall, the interior of which were coated with pigment. The intense matt quality of the dry powder sucked in light creating oddly disorientating effects and tricks of the eye, something like the effects created by the light works of James Turrell. He also made some work in which large boulders of rock were drilled with cavities filled with pigment. Kapoor made an extremely large installation for a London museum which consisted of a 50 metre high 200 metre long trumpet like structure that tapered into a tube running the length of the museums entrance hall and curved into a second funnel. The work was made with a steel frame attached to which is a dark red rubber skin stretched to a smooth tautness.
!Kaprow Allan.
American artist working between the 1960s and 80s, Kaprow is best known for his Happenings in New York in the late 1960s. These were site specific installations in which a performance would happen witnessed by an invited audience. The Happenings were one of the earliest examples of artists making live art in galleries or gallery like spaces rather than in a theatre or studio space. One happening took place in a loft in which a structure of stud wall frames covered with transparent plastic sheeting created a box like space in which the performers could be seen but were obscured. Kaprow wrote a seminal book about the Happenings which was influential for artists making time based work. 
!Katz Alex.
American painter who has made large figurative paintings since the early 1970s. Katz's subjects are landscape and his family. He paints with flat acrylic paint, making each work in a day. The paint is applied simply and with no visible brushstrokes. Katz might paint a row of autumnal trees, trees in blossom, or he might paint his wife (repeatedly), his children, or groups of friends. All are shown in casual poses, yet the figures are presented at one remove, locked in time as if in a photograph. And indeed Katz in painting them from photographs and he is interested in highlighting that conjunction of distance and intimacy.   
!Kawara On.
Japanese artist who began working in the 1960s, Kawara known for a number of conceptual projects and endurance works. I Met I Went is a year of postcards written and mailed to friends and acquatinaces by Kawara every day for a year. The work with which Kawara is usually associated is a still accumulating work called the Date Paintigns, one of which he has made every day since the 1960s. Each identical 50cm high painting has the days date in white numerals on a black canvas.
!Kay Emma.
British artist who makes figurative paintings and portraits.
!Keene John.
British painter chosen to record the Gulf war for Britain. Keene later travelled to Afghanistan to record the war there, having become very interested in the depiction of armed conflict.
!Keifer Anselm|.
Keifer is a German expressionist painter working from the 1970s onwards. Keifer has made paintings and sculpture, both on a large scale, tending towards the monumental. He is often considered to be most important painters of the 1980s because he evolved a contemporary purpose for expressionistic painting and because of the operatic scale of his work. 
Keifer's paintings generally depict bare depopulated interiors, for example one that shows an attic like space, which is entirely composed of painted wooden planks. He uses a restrained palette of earth colours, black and white with dark reds and blues, and his work often has a atmosphere of darkness and foreboding. 
Keifer's sculpture is often presented as an installation, for example a row of hospital beds, the sheets actually made of lead sheet, draped over the beds, in the centre of which are shallow depressions some of which are filled with water, as if to denote the transformation or passing of the occupant of the bed
!Keinholz Ed.
Artist working in from the 1960s to 80s, Keinholz created several installations including the Beanery, a tiny kiosk set up as bar which the viewer could enter. The space inside was disorientating. Keinholz's installations usually featured life-size figures cast from plaster, unpainted, and real furniture, fittings and fabric. 
!Keita Seydou.
An African artist who photographed the extraordinary qualities he found in ordinary people. The photographs are black and white.
!Kelley Mike.
US artist making sculptures and drawing, Kelley has a particular interest in history, politics and the state. Often uses unwanted and second hand materials, car boot and charity shop purchases. Series of formal sculptural works using soft toys, for example a large wall relief made off found soft toys sewn onto a found blanket, which uses abject objects to makes reference to abstract expressionist painting, and highlights craft and homemade qualities, drawing a comparison between different values assigned to cultural production. Similar floor pieces - two soft toy dogs face each other across a small blanket, somehow an encounter that seems serious and eloquent. A number of different sized toys under a large grey blanket entitled Lumpenprole a jokey reference to the greyness and poverty of ordinary working lives and a pun on the German - a lumpy grey blanket is just what the work appears to be.
A large collection of soft toys fills a room neatly laid out on trestle tables, all accompanied by measuring sticks, as if in some kind of statistical survey, post mortem, or the aftermath of a mass disaster like an air crash. The soft toys used to represent human kind in its lowliness and vulnerability. Kelley manages to use these materials in such a way as to produce a formal sculptural works that have a seriousness that belies their existence as discarded and undervalued objects. 
In fact Kelley eschews conventional art materials on the whole. A series of felt banners made in a homespun way, around 6feet by 4 feet, in which he replicates flyers found on the street usually made by grass root organisations bearing populist messages, or even just advertisements. 
An installation called Plato's cave which has large panels with drawings of American leaders like Lincoln accompanied by substantial text all round the wall. Drawing with marker pen and use of handwritten text also common in Kelley's work. 
!Kelly Ellsworth.
US sculptor working born in 1930s best known for his 1960s - 80s work, wall mounted steel shapes, distorted rhomboid, parallelogram, triangular, immaculately spray painted in matt primary colours and black and white, and butted up together one colour and shape against another to create abstract works which are both sculpture and painting and have a contemplative lyrical presence. 
!Kelly Mary.
US artist who made works dealing with feminist issues from the 1970s onwards. Kelly's seminal work is the Post Partum Document, an extremely influential work made in 1973 which documents the birth and emergence into language of her son Kelly. The work takes the form of about thirty framed panels, each containing an object and a text. The object might be a soiled nappy (which helped to gather tabloid attention at the time), an item of clothing. The text details the child's weight and length, age in weeks, and describes his development with notes on his linguistic development. This is a work which documents the birth of her child and her care for his life as a creative activity, making the point that the birth of a child, as revealed here through the banal objects and detail, is a profoundly creative act. This startlingly simple and obvious statement caused a great deal of criticism and publicity, the Post Partum Document was declared not to be art, to be offensive, to be cruel. Questions about the artists motherhood were raised, and from all this it can be deduced that the work made its point very successfully. Motherhood is a taboo, it is work which is not to be considered work, not on a par with artistic achievement and not to be revealed in all its messy detail. 
The works form was important. it was predominantly a text work and this was another of Kelly's points - that text, or language, is how the subject is constituted and that we are not subjects until we are speaking subjects. The emergence of a child into language is therefore the most important moment in our existence and this is made possible by the mother (or primary carer, as we should add today). Kelly drew on the works of Lacan the French literary theorist who developed the theory of the other and the difference between  the male and female subject. and of psychoanalytical writers like Freud, Klein. Lacan's theories on the constitution of the subject were particularly influential for a whole generation of artists in the 1980s, mostly but not all women.
Kelly's later work developed into institutional critique always wall and text based. She made a number of highly crafted metal medallions or wall plaques.
!Kelly Michael UK.
British artist born in the 1940s died 1990s. Kelly made wood and metal abstract sculpture.
!Kerbel Janice.
Canadian artist working in Britain, born in 1969. Kerbels' work is conceptual and usually research based, and is carried out in variety of media, united by her interest in desire and its link to deception. Kerbel's research often involves a degree of controlled risk, and elements of detective work. The place of desire in Kerbels work is elucidated by her invention of utopian places and ideal conditions. 
Kerbels earliest works from the early 1990s concern subterfuge and malicious intent. A table is laden with jam made from poisonous plants. Snippings is a series of minutes snippings taken from the clothes of strangers, who remain unaware of this affront. The snippings are mounted and titled with the date and the place on the garment and type of garment from which the snipping is taken. Trust Me (Remington) is typed on a blue sheet of letter paper, folded once, with a ring stain from a coffee mug on it. The letter s has jumped and is higher than the rest as if it had been typed on a manual typewriter in the days when the author of a letter could be traced by mechanical faults in the way a typewriter functioned, such as a raised letter. Accompanying this is a disc containing a digital typewriter style font with a raised s that Kerbel has created.
Kerbel's interest in deception led her to invent four Magic Tricks fro which she designed the apparatus as if it were flat pack furniture. The tricks included levitation table and disappearance box. Like much of Kerbels work the plans and drawings are the work, which is never actually realised. This is intrinsic for the success of the work as it hinges on Kerbel's interest in the desire to do unacceptable or impossible things. 
Places to Bury a Body illustrates this. A series of photo pHs show very ordinary places such as a front garden, where there is no obvious hiding space but the acknowledgment that a hole could be dug. Or a cliff top over which a body could be thrown. Bank Job (1999) consists of two cork board panels onto which are pinned detailed plans for a bank robbery from an existing bank in the City of London. There are reconnaissance photographs, detailed floor plans, a map of the getaway route, and an exhaustive time line of the robbery, listing all the participants, entrances and exits, times and vehicles involved. Bank Job is a work which presents the inconceivable as something which anyone could carry out.
A number of Kerbel's works are concerned with how to cheat. Home Fittings is a series of floor plans, made for existing rooms and buildings, on which Kerbel indicates where a person might walk in order to avoid any creaking floorboards or flooring, and where a person might stand in relation to doors to avoid casting a shadow that might give away their presence. These places are indicated in the space by the insertion of thin brass rods flush with the floor. Marked Decks are prints showing the backs of packs of playing cards, the patterns on which have been subtly altered to allow a person in the know to deduce the suit and number of the card. A letter typed on blue paper seems to allude to a failed tryst, an unfulfilled desire. A number of Kerbel's works deal with this explicitly, for example Bird Island (2000) a web project and book. Kerbel invented an island paradise based on a real uninhabited Caribbean island, and designed a website that invited the purchase of timeshare in the island. The topography, flora, fauna and the style of the buildings on the island are explained and illustrated in detail. The site persuade the viewer to buy into a dream which doesn't exist. Any applicants would receive a brochure. Kerbel even invented a bird, the Exuma Emerald, which she later illustrated by commissioning a drawing from a bird illustrator and the creation of its potential song from a bird song expert, presented as cd. Further to this Kerbel made a number of drawings of fantasy islands in which she played god, taking control of the climate and thus the flora and fauna. In 2003 Kerbel made a series of drawings of hypothetical planters for specified but unnamed buildings. The planters and the plants they contained are designed to grow the most suitable plants for the buildings climactic conditions in the best possible way, thus the plant lists take account of light quality and direction, temperature and humidity, the planters make the most of available light and maximise the planting relevant to the size of the space. The floor plans indication the light source and type, the scale and disposition of the planters, the function of the building and the climactic conditions There is a respiration garden for a Gym, for example, planters for low light in a Victorian house, a shelf garden for a student room, a hanging garden for a launderette and one for a bathroom both making use of high humidity, and circular garden for a revolving restaurant. 
!Kertesz Andresz.
Eastern European photographer working in the early twentieth century, many of Kertsz's images are instantly familiar, including one of the Arc de Triomphe in Paris, seen from a bird's eye view, with snow on the road surface, the tracks of the few vehicles on the streets at that date inscribing black parabolas around it on the white ground.
!Kilimnik Karen.
American artist born around 1960 who is primarily a painter, although she has begun to make photographic work in the 2000s. Kilimnik's practise is project based. She makes work around a particular theme and usually presents it as an installation. One such project dealt with the fantasy life of teenage girls, and featured a gallery with purple painted walls, drawings on the walls with lots of text which has a diaristic quality, paintings and autumn leaves strewn on the floor. Another had a Russian theme, and has paintings that have qualities of Russian icons, with Russian themes, and snow scenes, objects and stuffed animals and drifts of artificial snow on the floor. Kilimnik's paintings are rarely more than 60 cm high.
Kilimnik has many pets and animals are a constant in her work, in particular a pet cockatoo, a crow called Ralph, and dogs and cats. Ralph's portrait shows him both as he is and covered in ectoplasm (Ralph in Ectoplasm).
Another installation is based on a detailed study of ballet, in particular Giselle, and features gallery walls painted dark red, the paintings and drawings in black frames depicting scenes from the ballet, imagined related scenes, and a sculpture on a plinth. Some of the paintings have black velvet ribbon bows on the frame and silk flowers.
Kilimnik's work hovers close to kitschness and sweetness which is held in check by her skill as a painter and the darkness of some of her subject matter.
In 2001 Kilimnik made a series of photographs of central park in New York showing the park in winter in low light conditions. By careful framing, the light conditions, and aided by the appearance of a horse drawn carriage used to convey tourists on sightseeing tours, Kilimnik showed the park as if it had been photographed in the nineteenth century. These were shown alongside a number of landscapes and cityscapes that are also painted in an anachronistic style. Kilimnik's work is distinctive for its combination of rich reference to the past and the history of art with an autobiographical and contemporary approach to painting.
!King Philip.
King is a British artist who made large steel sculptures between the 1960s and 80s. King made a number of public commissions many of which can still be seen, for example there is one in Fulham in London, a red painted tubular steel structure a bit like a climbing frame. King also made the designs for the decoration of the walls of Embankment underground station in London.
!King Scott.
King is a British artist born in the 1960s and publisher of an magazine called Crash!. Crash! is a broadsheet sized magazine written and designed by King and another person, which features anti-establishment satire and polemic mixed with cultural criticism and appreciation in the form of poster style text, graphics and images. It is witty and uncompromising, and is a hybrid of magazine and art work which is implicitly critical of the magazine publishing industry. King's solo work draws on these approaches. He has made collages from magazine images and a large number of text works often in the form of numbered lists. In the 2000s King's texts became more autobiographical and often self deprecating. They are designed and typeset in Kings very visual style. One work is entitled 'Why I Never Became A Punk' and consists of a list of the reasons for this.
!Kirchner Ernst Ludwig.
Kirchner was a German expressionist painter. His paintings are brightly coloured, with angular stylised figures, and lots of brushstrokes. Kirchner was the founder of an artists group called die Brucke, (The Bridge) which published a magazine of critical texts called the Blaue Reiter (Blue Rider).
!Kirk, Joanna.
!Kitson Linda. 
British painter and war artist.
!Klee Paul.
French painter working at the beginning of the twentieth century. Klee's work is delicate and colourful. He made a large number of small paintings and an enormous range of works on paper, both drawing and printmaking. Klee used thin drawn lines to make geometric patterns, often repeated triangles or squares, with dots, which would be coloured and often resemble patchwork. Sometimes these remained as abstract patterns, at other times Klee would draw figures, trees, buildings or animals. 
!Klega Michael.
German artist born in the 1960s, Klega makes wall drawings form unspoiled cassette tape wound round map pins, sculptures from plastic water bottles. He utilises everyday materials like adhesive tape to make his minimal but often dryly humorous works.
!Klein Jochen.
German artist born in the 1960s died in the late 1990s. Klein's water colour and collage paintings have an oneric atmosphere, as if the protagonists were lost in time. The collage, usually an image from a magazine often a person, is often the starting point for a painting. Klein extended the collaged image by painting out from it. He used thin washes of colour on a white ground, often leaving areas deliberately unfinished, to make translucent and light filled images. He uses Klein also made works on paper including a pop up book made from collaged images featuring a pop up penis as its centrefold. 
!Klein Yves.
French artist who was working from the late 1940s to the 60s. Klein's subject was the condition of art, and he made several works which gained him notoriety, in particular the Blue Paintings. These were made as a performance in a gallery in Paris. Klein invited female models to act a human brushes. He applied ultramarine blue paint to their naked bodies and then directed them to position themselves and move their bodies in certain ways, making body prints onto paper he had placed on the floor and walls. Klein's idea was to use the nude to paint the nude. The resulting body prints were exhibited, but the photographic documentation of the event became better known. Later on he made some fire and smoke paintings for which he set fire to canvases and marked them with smoke. 
ultramarine blue was Klein's trademark colour. All his painted work and sculpture was made using it. He made a large number of paintings in the 1950s and early 60s using natural sponges stuck to canvas and the whole painted blue. He also made simple blue canvases. Similarly he made sculptures with the sponges, often creating tableaux of his flower or seaweed like creations.
Klein worked briefly in ceramics, making small sculptures that drew on porcelain table ornaments; Klein made his own lumpen thrown together and glazed versions that nevertheless made their sources clear. 
The other strand to Klein's work is more conceptual. He made many works with found objects and works which were events and documentations of actions. He made a work with a light bulb and several works with furniture.  
The best known of these works are the Leap into the Void, a staged photograph in which Klein is seen apparently leaping off a high wall in a street and falling through the air. There is a house on the left and a lamppost behind him. The photograph is about 40 cm high, portrait format. Paris Air was a sealed glass vial containing nothing but air, to which Klein accorded a status as an art work and a monetary value. In a performance work Klein sold gold leaf which he had authenticated to collectors and then invited them to throw the work they had just bought into the river Seine. He also printed his own bonds, and sold these as works of art. The work which summed up Klein's interests most completely was The Void. This work was a staged event. Klein rented an empty gallery. He sent out invitations to the opening of his exhibition, provided champagnes and hired a commissionaire to stand on the door. No one was allowed to enter the gallery without an invitation. When they did so they found an empty gallery - the void of the title.  
!Klimt Gustav.
An Austrian artist working at the turn of century based in Vienna, klimt painted highly decorative images of women with particular attention to the reproduction of the patterns on textiles and clothes the models are wearing. He also painted landscapes, giving the same attention to the 'pattern' of leaves and flowers, such as in his series The Four Seasons, paintings of woodlands and gardens in seasonal colours. Klimt had a very distinctive style of drawing the figure, giving his almost exclusively female subjects a kind of languid beauty. They are often draped in decadent poses or staring straight at the viewer giving an impression of forthrightness, and unabashed hedonism. One example is a painting of a standing woman, her head almost resting on one shoulder, wearing an extraordinarily ornate dress and cloak which has a pattern of multicoloured and gold squares. In fact Klimt's trademark was his use of tooled and flat gold leaf applied to the patterns on fabric in his paintings. He also tended to delineate the shape of the body by the outline of the clothes, so that the figure often appeared to be a solid block. These attributes give Klimt's work a graphic effect. Another example is a painting of four women who are lying together on a bed. Klimt's paintings often show women together in intimacy, lying together in an embrace. In this painting the four are intertwined and seen in a kind of false perspective as if from above. It is hardly possible to tell which limbs belong to which head. The fabrics of their clothes are mixed together too so that the composition is a swirl of heads, limbs and pattern, creating a kind of round shape within the frame of the canvas. 
!Kline Franz.
American artist who made abstract expressionist paintings from the 1950s onwards. Kline's paintings usually feature large black gestural marks made with a big brush, on a the white or even un-primed ground of enormous canvases. Much of the ground is left untouched but it becomes an active part of the surface of the painting.
!Knall Ulli.
Swiss artist living in Britain who makes ceramic sculptures. Knall has made a series of small busts of characters from television programmes such as Star Trek, and other invented characters, as well as portraits of her friends. These are modelled in a simple almost naïve style. Other works include small fountains. Most of Knall work is on a domestic scale, ranging between 30 to 80 cm high. The sculptures are painted and glazed carefully in realistic colours. 
!Knur Karen.
British artist born around 1960 whose conceptual text and photographic image work is concerned with the interrogation of the institution.
!Koetther Jutta.
Koetther is a German artist born in the 1960s who makes large messy paintings and drawings with text added. These are apparently autobiographical and personal but remain mysterious. The paintings are large and scruffy, often appearing to have been made on the floor over a period of time.
!Kokoschka Oscar.
German artist who painted before and after the first world war, figurative works.
!Kollwitz Kathe. 
Austrian artist contemporaneous drawings of the holocaust mainly in graphite and charcoal, often of women.
!Koons Geoff.
American artist, formerly a banker, born in the late 1950s who became known in the 1980s for his photographic works based on advertisements. Koons invented magazine advertisements based on existing ones and had them professionally photographed featuring himself as the model. He then placed these ads in art magazines in effect advertising himself. This strategy was intended to show that an artist and a career could be invented and promoted. 
Having achieved this Koons began to make sculptural works. He first made a marble bust of himself, which he had carved by the best stone carver he could find. It was whiter marble with a slight sparkle to it. 
Koons was initially one of number of new York artists making work that became known as Neo Geo. His first works were objects in glass cases, fro example a baseball, apparently suspended in mid air inside a vitrine on a plinth, and a number of pristine vacuum cleaners in a large case (probably a pun on the idea of the airless vacuum). These early works relied on the purchase and representation of readily available objects, with a nod Duchamp and later influencing Damien Hirst.
Koons then began to design sculptures based on trinkets and souvenirs enlarged to many times their original size and presented on plinths. These works of art called attention to the status of the work of art, its value, the skill of its making and its authorship, because Koons rarely made anything himself. Instead he ordered his works to be made to his detailed plans by the best crafts people he could find in the medium that interested him.
The first was a serried of porcelain sculptures for example one of Michael Jackson reclining with a poodle, some large flowers taken from a children's model set, and one of an enlarged children's Cabbage Patch Kid doll. The sculptures were made by the best porcelain artists (in eastern Europe), hand painted, gilded. They were extremely kitsch but very striking due to their size (about one metre high usually). Koons was interested in how an object of little value other than sentimental value which may however have cost the owner quite a lot (the nature of souvenirs) might be transformed into an art object of immense value despite its bad taste, lack of traditional fine art values and lack of the artists hand in its making. 
Koons made several groups of works in a similar way, for example cast metal which was highly chromed (a train set which is a decanter glasses and coaster holder, a balloon rabbit), and polychromed wood vases of flowers, extremely detailed pieces of virtuoso carving made in Germany by master carvers.  
He later made a number of extremely large site specific works, the flower sculptures, for which he again borrowed the talents of others. The first of these was a 20 metre high Scottie dog covered with flowers the colours of which in some way functioned like the dots on a billboard poster.
In the mid 1990s Koons married la Cicciolina and Italian porn actress and made a series of photographic works which were styled as stills from a porn film, using professional stylists and photographers once again. The images had a degree of shock value since some featured clearly visible penetration. Koons and Cicciolina stared out at the viewer. The images were odd hybrids of pornography and portrait.
After a much publicised divorce from la Cicciolina Koons began in the late 1990s to make 2 or 3 metre high paintings of enlarged parts of things, such as balloons, mixtures of toys, household objects and natural things, so enlarged and partially valise as to be hard to interpret. These are painting by a studio full of assistants to Koons's designs. 
!Kounellis Janis.
Greek artist who was very successful in the 1980s when he made a number of large installations. Kounellis used the image of the horse quite a lot, as well as metal constructions and soot or smoke-like pigment. His subject matter was to do with the relation of cultural history to the modern world. 
!Kovats Tania.
British artists who uses model making materials to construct landscapes on shelves mounted on the wall, grassy hills and valleys with trees, rivers and lakes, microcosmic three dimensional landscapes.
!Krasner Lee.
Krasner was an abstract painter who married Jackson Pollock and found herself nursing him through alcoholism to his death. She established a foundation in their joint names which through its grant making activities contributes to the careers of many artists. Krasner is now dead.
!Kruger Barbara.
Kruger made a seminal body of work in the 1980s using photographic collage and text. Her work is feminist and political. Using skills developed in her paid job in graphic design Kruger began to juxtapose generic images with generic phrases and slogans that she slightly altered to make a political point. She appropriated styles from Russian constructivist art and socialist graphics. For example, a female hand with long immaculately manicured nails in black and white with the slogan in bold Helvetica black 'protect me from what I want' diagonally across the image. A closed eye appropriated from a surrealist photograph is captioned 'I am your almost nothing'. One of her most copied slogans is 'I shop therefore I am'. Kruger's skill was in the juxtaposition of slogan and image producing a powerful effect. She rarely used colour but when she did it was almost always red. Her work was produced as postcards and achieved wide dissemination making her one of the best known artists of her generation.
!Krystufek Elke.
Austrian artist born in 1970s whose subject is herself and her own body portrayed in videos, drawings and paintings of herself in her daily life. However Krystufek often appears naked, usually made up with the red lipstick which is characteristic of the videos and the drawings, sometimes in an abject state and her work is also a portrait of neurosis. Her emotional state is usually unexplained and never indulgent. A video self portrait, for example is shot with a hand-held (thus never more than arms length away) as she spins around dancing. Her own apartment is often the setting for the work. 
!Kuitca.
Painter
Kupka Frantisek.
Painter
!Laderman Ukeles Mierle.
American artist who made a collaborative work with the New York Sanitation Department in the 1980s. Laderman Ukeles staged a performance in which she shook the hand of every sanitation worked in New York, an action that highlighted and reversed the desired invisibility of waste disposal, unwillingness to consider the quantities and marginalisation of those that carry out a daily task without which life would become untenable. Another part of this project was the design and construction of a refuse collection cart with mirrored sides. This cart was used on the daily round, and as it travelled the city streets the people that created the refuse that it held were reflected clearly in its sides.
!Laib Wolfgang.
artist working from the 1990s onwards, Laib makes installations. He made a floor work by sifting bright yellow pollen over a large rectangle shape in an even layer, the colour startlingly bright. The effect of this work lies in the contrast between the minimal quality of the work, the quantity of the material and the viewers knowledge of the organ and potential of the material and the work required to obtain it.
!Lambie Jim.
British artist working from the 1990s onwards who made a number of floor installations in which the floor of a gallery or museum is entirely covered in stripes made of plastic tape in different colours and widths, the stripes following the floor plan of the room, running round the edge of the room and moving inwards towards the centre of the room concentrically until the centre is reached. Sometimes Lambie might use black and whiter tape, or metallics. Lambie also made wall sculptures from ordinary domestic objects such as record player turntables, mattresses, mirrors which are covered in glitter. 

!Landers Sean.
American artist born in the 1960s who made a number of very large text paintings in the 1990s. the text on these paintings is essentially a diary of his life as an artist. In these works Landy tries a new way of carrying out the traditional task of the artist to make life into art. The canvas of one 3 meter high painting rolls onto the floor at the bottom, reaching toward the viewer implying a physical inclusion in the work, and in the viewing and reading space. 
Landers went on to make a series of very large paintings after famous artists such as Picasso, copying works and adding to them, so that they are instantly recognisable but recognisable different.
!Landseer Edwin.
British nineteenth century portrait painter who also painted dogs. 
!Landy Michael. 
Landy is a British artist who was born in the 1960s. He began career making obsessively detailed cartoon-like drawings in black pen featuring a multitude of images and text. These drawings created an alternative world of social and political comment and from them emerged a large scale installation, Scrapheap Services in the late 1990s. Scrapheap Services is a fictitious company which carries out the collection and disposal of unwanted members of society. What Landy showed was a collection of the trolleys, uniforms, printed literature, signage, bins and waste bags, all bearing the companies logo and livery. The paper literature was stern all over the floor as if it were itself rubbish. He also made a flower stall. Landy's next large scale work further developed his interest in human waste and the value of inanimate objects, sentimentality and materiality. This involved the professional construction of a large waste disposal plant consisting of a conveyor belt for sorting, various grading machines and a compressing, shredding and grinding machines, reducing everything to a pulp. Landy passed every single item had every owned through this machine: the contents of his flat, his car, his clothes. The item he found most difficult to destroy was his deceased fathers coat. The machinery was installed in a temporarily empty department store ground floor and open to the public every day. The list of items destroyed remains as the document of the work.
In 2003 Landy made a number of botanical drawings of weeds species and varieties that might be found growing in the streets and waste areas of London.
!Lane Abigail.
Born in eh 1960s Lane has made a number of installations. For one of these she papered a gallery space a wall paper printed with bloody hand prints. In the centre of the room a female figure constructed from a collection of clothes, shoes and a wig hung from a rope. 
!Langlands and bell.
Two artists who work together producing works that investigate architecture and the built environment and its relating to the lives of people. In the late 1990s they made a work which consisted of a series of white chairs with models of buildings set into seats visible through a glass top to the seat. They made a series of works about the panopticon plan for prison buildings. 
!Lanyon Peter.
St Ives painter one of a group of artist who went to live in St. Ives in Cornwall in the 1930s to avoid London during the blitz and then through the  40s and 50s. chiefly for the quality of the light. St Ives became a centre for artists including Barbara Hepworth and Patrick Heron. Lanyon painted semi-abstract landscapes. Used a lot o green brown and white.
!Lautrec Henri de Toulouse.
Toulouse Lautrec was a graphic artist who was friends with many of the artist of fin de siecle Paris. He is best known for his posters for the Folies Bergere in particular for one showing a row of can can dancers. He was a superb draughtsman. Often portrayed in films set in the period and known suffer from a medical condition that reduced his growth. 
!Leahy Matthew.
British artist born in the 1970s died in 1999. Leahy made landscape paintings in particular snow capped mountains.
!Leapman David.
British artist who began working in the mid 1980s. His paintings used repeating motifs on a plain ground, the lines themselves removed from the surface of the canvas revealing that under the plain flat colour is very bright multicoloured painting. He later began to use fluorescent colours. 
!Leckey Mark.
British artist born 1976 makes video and sound installations. Leckey's work comes out of club and street culture, but has a serious intent. His video Fiorucci made me hardcore shows intercuts footage of the British northern soul scene with hardcore house clubs, edited to make a compelling testament to transcendence through dance and music. Other works come out of his experience as a dj.
!Lee Rosa.
one of generation of British women artist born in the early 1960s who developed a self defined 'feminist abstraction' that owed much to Brigit riley. Their work defined itself by its relation to 80s and 90s feminist critique of abstract painting, in particular that claiming the painting as the body, and painting an act of 'writing the body'. Lees work employed repeated decorative elements such as bows and ribbons on a brushstroke ground. Rebecca Fortnum, Vanessa?? Therese Oulton.
!Leger Fernand.
French painter 1920s distinctive style of painting figures as if their bodies are composed of tubular elements, in shaded greys on a whiter ground with occasional additions of primary colours. 
!Lempicka Tamara de.
French artist working in the 1920s and 30s, Lempicka made a number of paintings and small sculptures usually showing herself or other women in a highly stylised graphic style. Lempicka is distinctive in her own work for her straight bobbed hair with low fringe and fashionable clothes. 
!Levine Sherrie.
American conceptual artist who became extremely successful in the 1980s and influenced a generation of younger artists. Levine's primary interest is in the status of the work of art and of the reproduction. In this interest makes evident her interest in the work of Marcel Duchamp. Levine made a number of chequer board works painted on wood, a number of paintings in which she simply reproduced a cartoon character in outline (such as Charlie Brown), a number of black and white photographs by famous photographers, and of a marble torso sculpture which she signed, declaring the work to be then authenticated by her and therefore made by her.
She made some works using wooden ply in which she utilises the oval insert of ply that fills the hole where there was a knot as part of the image, she made some works using gold leaf which dealt with another interest of hers in the perceived versus the intrinsic value of a work of art. Levine's work is almost exclusively small, no bigger than 80cm high. Levine's work essentially borrows the work of other artists, Levin either remaking it (as she did in a number of drawings and watercolours after certain artists, which are then signed and authenticated as by her), or elevating another art from to the status of work of art. Levine took the unacceptable: fakery, plagiarism and false authentication and made it the subject of her work. 
!Lewandowska, Marysia and Cummings, Neil.
British artists working together who make theoretical conceptual investigations into economies, culture and knowledge, resulting in a socio-political project based practise which may be presented in many different forms. They made a project in London with the Bank of England which was the result of a period of research. They presented documentation of their research and made it possible for museum visitors to interact with their work.
!Lewis Mark.
British artist born in the 1950s who works in 35 mm film and video. Lewis's work since the 1980s has stemmed from his interest in and knowledge of the history of cinema. He uses the structure and visual language to construct short looped films presented as installations and longer more narrative scripted films using actors.
Lewis presents everyday scenes and situations through the lens of cinematic production, prompting the viewer to consider the inconsequential as a moment of grandeur, and to question what they are seeing. 
A short looped film made in the late 1990s shot from inside a café A woman is talking to a man outside on the pavement right in front of the window. But there is something odd about their conversation. The man doesn't seem to be listening to the woman. Eventually a car passes and disappears mid screen. Then other traffic does the same, coming from both directions, as do pedestrians. Now the viewer begins to think that they are watching a split screen, a convention occasionally used in cinema to show a telephone conversation or to show two things happening simultaneously, and that in fact the couple are not talking to each other but to others. 
Finally it becomes clear that in fact the dividing on the screen is in fact the edge of a mirror on the wall of the café, which exactly reflect the street outside. The woman is in fact reflected in this mirror and is talking to someone else out of view. The man is seen through the window and is on his own, waiting. 
A film made in a city housing estate shows a concrete walkway with tower blocks rising above it, the vast empty space punctuated and enlivened by children playing games. 
Another film shows a derelict building of which only the façade and floors. The camera moves towards the building extremely slowly. As it moves the viewer becomes aware of the trajectory of the camera, something that is largely unnoticed usually. It is moving in and down from a great height and the shot is continues. The camera reaches the building and enters a window. On a table in the empty roofless space is a child's spinning top. This short looped film places the viewer in the position of the camera and makes the process of filming evident and the subject of the work. The camera is finally understood to be on a very high crane which is also moving on a track, usually only associated with big budget film making. 
Another work shows A section of an black and white silent film showing an elevated cast iron railway upside down. A landscape work shows an iced over lake in a snowy landscape with a solitary skater on the ice.
Lewis has made narrative films using actors, including one shot in a garden in California which uses porn actors, one shot in a Californian desert hotel, Peeping Tom (a homage to the feature film of the same name) and The Pitch, which shows Lewis himself standing in the middle of the main concourse of a railway station talking to the camera, oblivious to the people around him. By the end of his monologue it becomes apparent that he is pitching the idea for the very film that the viewer is watching directly to the viewer.
!Lewisjohn Cedar.
American or Canadian artist who makes abstract pattern paintings and related drawings which reflect his work as a dj.
!Lewitt Sol.
American conceptual artist who made installation and drawings. Lewitt is best known for his wall drawings made in pencil directly onto the wall which is painted either black or white. Lewitt devises a complex geometric pattern of lines, parallel, radiating or on a grid, which is drawn in coloured pencil, forming a barely perceptible drawing which nevertheless has a strong effect on the space and adds glowing areas of colour. 
!Lichtenstein Roy.
American artist working from the 1960s onwards, Lichtenstein's work was among the best known of the pop artists. He made paintings using images from printed cartoon magazines. Lichtenstein took single frames or even a detail from a frame and enlarged it, initially to about one metre high but eventually to a much larger size. He then made a painting form the drawing, reproducing exactly what he saw including any text. Initially the paintings were black and white but Lichtenstein soon mover to colour. The painting s nearly always feature a person, a part of a vehicle and a graphic depiction of fire, speed, force, for example. They are part of a larger narrative which we are left to guess at.
Eventually Lichtenstein began to paint the dots made by the printing process, easily visible in the magazine but very obvious when enlarged. These dots are obvious on billboards when they are viewed close up. By making the dots part of the painting Lichtenstein was reproducing a reproduction and the means of its reproduction. He was actually painting the printing process. He used the cyan magenta and yellow process colours on a white ground, with black. From a distance his paintings appeared to be made in flat colours, from close up the dots were the main component. 
Certain of Lichtenstein's works became iconographic, for example one of a fighter pilot in a cockpit of a plane that has a yellow flash coming from. The text announces the pilots thought at that moment. Another of a glamorous woman crying, again with text revealing her thoughts. His style was and still it copied, plagiarised and borrowed.
!Ligon Glenn.
American artist born in the 1960s who made work about black American identity. A lot of Ligon's work took slavery and its legacy as a starting point. He made installations and added text to them and also made photographic works. A canvas punch bag hanging from the ceiling on a rope has a poetic story of a slave prize fighter stencilled on its white surface in black letters, as if it were both a painting and a sack. This object symbolised the body of the slave, captive to be treated as an object, subjected to punches, traded as goods. A boxing ring has text inscribed around it in a similar way. Ligon made a version of the US Flag drawn in black with words where the stars and stripes would be. In his work he drew attention to the objectification of black Americans, particularly black American men.
!Lin Maya. 
Lin, an American artist, was chosen by competition to design the Vietnam war memorial in Washington. She designed a long highly polished black marble wall, inscribed on which in columns are the names of all those who lost their lives in combat in the Vietnam war. The wall is set into the ground at ground level, and appears to be gradually revealed as the ground in front of it is excavated to slope down. The top of the wall remains level parallel with the ground and the viewer descends passing along the wall which becomes higher in relation to them the further along the wall they walk.
The memorial is extremely popular, it ahs been profoundly successful in conveying the feelings of a generation of the bereaved and indeed of those who did not believe that America should have fought in Vietnam. Perhaps this is due to its simple formal qualities and its gentle interactivity with the viewer. The memorial invites participation and takes the viewer down below ground level, to see the names symbolically buried but rising up to meet the light. Its surface is reflects the viewers, so that a multitude of face appear on its surface. 
!Linke Simon.
British artist born around 1960 who became known in the late 1980s for his post-modern conceptual painting. Linke reproduced advertisements from art magazines on small canvases about 60 cm high, painting the text very accurately but using thick impasto. He chose to reproduce mostly advertisements printed in black and white. The paintings appear from a distance to be exactly what they represent. The texture and application of the paint is what makes them paintings, reducing painting to its fundamentals. These works became iconographic, and were seen to represent a particular moment in conceptual art.
The subject matter of the paintings could be said like much of the art of the time to be reproduction, the condition of reality, the status of the subject. Indeed much critical theory of the time investigated the nature of reality and reproduction under the influence of Baudrillard. Many conceptual artists in the 1980s read the works of Saussure and other writers interested in semiotics. There was a marked emphasis on the constitution of the subject through language, and language and text as a system of signs and signifiers. For Baudrillard and other post-modern theorists, the real world was no more real than the reconstructed world of representation. Linke and other artists like Sherrie Levine made this the subject of their work. There was also a concern for the status of the art object, its aura, which came from readings of the work of Walter Benjamin.
Following this work in the late 1990s Linke began to work with text for its own sake, making the paintings in the same way but not reproducing anything.
!Lippi Fillipo.
medieval Italian artist, painter of religious scenes.
!Lloyd Hilary.
British artist born in the 1960s who makes video films that she terms sculptures. Lloyds films are always presented on a specified size of monitor anything ranging from a portable personal TV with head phones to a large monitor. The monitors are placed on monitor stands of a particular type, in particular relation to each other. Some works may consist of two monitors places back to back. The viewer is never a typically passive receiver, since they have to walk round the monitors and Lloyds work is never shown projected.
Lloyds films have a minimal sculptural quality. She is chiefly interested in people and banal repetitive activities. For example, in Colin, made in the mid 1990s, a young man standing on some derelict land between two buildings proceed to slowly pick up, examine and discard the items that he finds there, pieces of wood and metal and other kinds of refuse. He does this slowly, very deliberately, as if there were some kind of purpose to his actions, which become quite compelling and graceful in repetition.
Colin, like most of Lloyd's work involving people, met the artist in a club and she persuaded him to allow her to film him. She takes pains to allow her subjects to make their own decisions about what they will do as she films, arrived at through social interaction. In this sense she is emphatically not directing the action. 
Other works have featured a man pulling a jumper off over his head played in forward and reverse on back to back monitors so that it becomes a kind of dance. There is one of a young man sitting on the floor cutting images out of magazines endlessly. There is a film in which two teenage girls hold a length of string between them, one has ball and slowly unwinds it the other winds the string back into a ball. The end of the film the girls have transferred the string from one to the other. 
Another film shows a woman in a white trouser suit sitting on a chair one leg resting on the other knee, smoking a cigarette. On the point of extinction of the cigarette the film loop begins again. Most of Lloyd's work is looped, including the works that do not feature people such as one which shows a reflection on the surface of water which is somehow read, the film becoming a shimmering abstract pattern. The films are always static camera single continuous shots, even one in which Lloyd attaches a camera to a skateboard and asks a skateboarder to skate. The resulting film of pavement, ground and then graffiti covered walls as the skateboard goes vertical is accompanied by the sound of the wheels. Similarly a film shot again form a static camera placed on the windowsill of the revolving restaurant in the post office tower show 360dgree panorama of London in the time it takes for the restaurant to revolve - this is quite slow so the image only changes imperceptibly. 
Lloyd made some films in which two djs are in a taxi going from one job to another, and a text and photographic work which features a dj called princess Julia. Later works from the early 2000s show the spray from a fountain against backdrop of trees, ebbing and flowing with the wind and the jet of the water, and a slide projection showing waiters at a café in St. marks square in Venice. Lloyd became interested in groups of people observed rather than single people invited to cooperate.
Lloyds work deals with the still moments in everyday life that can be considered as formal visual and discrete. Andy Warhol is a reference point for her work.
!Locke Hew.
British artist who made Cardboard Palace, a maze that fills a gallery from floor to ceiling made from corrugated cardboard sheets cut into shapes a bit like a Frank Stella wall relief, with light bulbs creating shadows. The cardboard is left brown with only the black felt pen outlines as adornment. The maze leads to a kind of sitting room with a tea table. There is lots of documentation about the British Royal Family pinned to the structures of the maze.
!Lockhart Sharon.
American artist born in the 1960s who makes films and photographic work. Lockhart's work has an anthropological vision, she is interested in how the cultural life of different society groups is portrayed by those who study it, and in how this can be made visual, or even in how the artist can make a similar portrayal with very different results. Lockhart made series of photographs of the inhabitants of dwellings that had been visited and described by anthropologists. The dwellings are shown uninhabited, and the inhabitants shown separately. Lockhart spent some time in Manaus in Brazil making a film set in the town theatre. Teatro Amazonia is a hour long single shot film showing the auditorium of the theatre seen from the stage. The audience in the theatre watching Lockhart's film are put in the position of performers on a stage watching the audience in Manaus. The performance of a piece of contemporary classical music begins, sung by an invisible choir on the stage in the position of the viewers.  The music begins with the tuning up of the orchestra and then takes the form of a single note of orchestral noise building into a continuously mutating wall of sound, then fading. The audience  on the screen watch, listen fidget, get up and go out occasionally. The minute detail of their behaviour becomes interesting. The viewer is able to watch something that would be unwatchable without the suspense created by the voices of the choir. 
The films titles list the audience participants, every single one of them, in groups dictated by the barrio that they live in. So that the image of the audience can be seen representing the people of the city of Manaus, and in fact they do this proportionally. The numbers of people from each barrio representing the relative population of each barrio. This list of names also reveals the family connections of the people of the city.
Lockhart subsequently made a film in a Japanese gymnasium where a group of women are doing physical drill. This is very regimented but balletic in the way that the space seems to be used choreographically. Lockhart films in similar choreographed shots to create a mesmeric document of a strict regime, in which the scrutiny of uniformity yields fascination for minute details of difference

!Long Richard.
British artist born in the 1950s, Long is a land artist and as such his site specific work exists mostly as documentation. Long began by making walks and documenting them with photographs. He would then mount these photographs relate them to sections of large scale survey maps showing the walk and the north south orientation, and print below them the distance walked as proportion of the total distance of the walk. In doing so he was developing ideas put into practice by American land artist Dennis Oppenheim in the 1960s and 70s, and anther artist who walked along coastlines, the walk, he declared, making a drawing of a line, the line being the demarcation between land and water. 
This idea of 'taking a line for a walk' has been explored by several artists. Longs walks were made all over Britain and then in other countries, they were mostly quite short. The photographs never showed a person. In Longs work the land itself, the ground on which we tread and the landscape it forms, is the subject. The artists subjectivity in terms of choice of walk is part of the work too. The viewer can imagine what it would be like to make the walk in terms of the feel of the ground underfoot and the inclines and descents.
Long developed his interest in the ground underfoot into an interest in the materials this comprised of. He brought clay, earth and stone into the gallery in various forms. Never making an actual mark on a landscape, Long began to being elements from the land into the gallery to make formal works. A number of temporary wall paintings made of mud and clay, thrown at the wall or splashed on with handprints, the mess and drips on the surrounding floor and wall allowed to remain. Long might make a circle of white clay splashes on a dark painted wall, or a horizontal band of dark mud on a white wall.
He also made rock floor sculptures, which make reference to the work of Carl Andre and Robert Smithson. A piece of the rock from a particular landscape would be cut into slices and then fragmented into enormous jagged shards, these laid out to fill a solid circle or band on the floor, in a sculptural echo of rock strata and of man made intervention such a roads and paths.
!Longo Robert.
American artist who made both paintings drawings and sculptures in the 1970s and 80s. The sculptures are usually complementary to or even shown as a part of a painted work. For example Longo made a number of works in tow and half metre high panels arranged in threes and fours, the panels showing a man clothed in a suit apparently falling to the ground (perhaps having been shot) although he could almost be dancing, some blank white panels and some cityscapes. The representational panels would often be drawn in pencil and graphite in a very realistic way. The panels are very well made. In some cases there is a bronze cast of a similar male figure placed in front of the wall panels, the best known being of man 'falling', the balance of the sculpture precarious. 
!Lorenzetti.
Italian fifteenth century painter, who painted a large wall painting which can be seen in Siena titled Good and Bad Government. This painting is the width of a room, situated high up near the ceiling. It shows a city on a hill with people going about their lives in productive and unproductive ways, with a man on a horse riding into the image from left.
!Lotto Lorenzo.
Italian renaissance painter and sculptor
!Louis Morris. 
American artist working in the 1960s and 70s who painted very large abstract works, distinctive for the technique Louis developed of pouring paint onto unprimed canvas. The thinned paint pooled and spread creating a soft irretgulatr edged shape, usually a stripe, with an element of chance playing a part in the position and direction fo the colour. Louis would use several colours, usually bright, to create the stripes, but leave the rest of the canvas bare.
!Louis Morris.
American artist who is known for his abstract pour paintings made in the 1960s and 70s. Louis developed a technique for pouring paint onto raw canvas and allowing the paint to pool and spread, soaking into the canvas yet the colours remaining distinct from one another. The resulting works are usually brightly coloured stripes emanating from one side of the canvas, spreading and blending on the edges, the texture of the surface of the canvas always visible.
!Lowe Bridget.
British artist born in the 1960s who works with text. Lowe made a work in which she took the titles of books and typeset them as a continuous text. She also made a work fro the web in which a text is presented to the viewer at a controlled pace.
!Lowe Colin and Thompson Roddy.
British artists who work together, both born in the 1960s. Lowe and Thompson have for a number years been conducting tongue in check correspondence with businesses, public agencies and institutions about art and artists. They make outlandish requests, complaints or suggestions but these are made in absolutely conventional ways, most often in the form of letters which themselves constitute the artist's work. They have also made site specific work including street banners.
!Lowry A S.
British artist painting in the 1940s onwards, now dead. Lowry lived and worked in the North of England and painted scenes of everyday and working class life in the cities of the North. He became known as a kind of peoples painter, a painter of 'matchstick men and matchstick cats and dogs' immortalised in a popular music song. Lowry's showed the grey light of northern winters and the relentless coming and going of daily life, showing buildings and a multitude of tiny people walking past. The people are painted in two or three brushstrokes, suggestions of figures so that Lowry could paint a great number of them on one painting. The paintings are often predominantly grey or white the figures in dark colours with little hints of bright colours. 
!Lucas, Sarah.
Lucas is a British artist born in the 1960s, one of the so-called Frieze generation of artists who were working in London in the early 1990s. She was a close friend of Tracy Emin's at this time and the two artist's opened a shop together. 
Lucas's work shows a preoccupation with sex death and female identity within a framework of humorous abjection. The work with which she became known was a mattress from a double bed placed against a wall, hall of it propped up, half on the floor. Inserted in openings cut in the mattress were two melons at the top on one side and a bucket on the part resting on the floor below them, whilst on the other side a cucumber was inserted at an angle of 45 degrees from the mattress, at the same level as the bucket. This was a crude but very expressive representation of the male and female forms reclining in bed and like a lot of Lucas's work a crude humour is used in a sophisticated way to represent universal sexual desires by formal but unconventional, and by implication not traditionally male sculptural means. 
Another work in similar vein A Kebab and Two Fried Eggs consist of an old wooden table with two fried eggs placed on it at one end and a pitta bread containing doner kebab at the other end. Plainly suggestive of female sexual anatomy, this work also represents the female form lying on a table, suggestive of sexual intercourse in simultaneously humorous and slightly threatening ways. 
Other early works have become iconic, in particular a photographic self portrait, one of a continuing series, of the artist sitting in a chair with feet up on a table at the front of the image nearest the viewer, clad in work boots. This uncompromising image presents Lucas as a female artist in male pose and clothes, a subject to which she returns often in these photographs. She holds a beer can between her knees and pulls the ring tab, for example, and the beer which has been shaken, spurts upwards. She sits on a toilet, her trousers round her ankles. Her work boots which  she is wearing in all the photos, are shown on their own. Lucas often has a cigarette hanging from her lips. These and other images portray the artist as a working man, bringing the viewers own preconceptions to their attention.
Small sculptures, such as a cast of the artists genitalia in a homage to Duchamp (a major influence), Lucas's own work boots with razor blades inserted into the sole at the toes also explore the theme of masculine and feminine identity as well as traditional artist's themes such as the nude body and the self portrait.
A collage of newspaper images from the Sun newspaper featuring vastly overweight women shows a distorted image of femininity.
In later works Lucas began to model forms more literally as in her series of sculptures which are covered entirely in cigarettes stuck on in a mosaic pattern, such a s motorbike and an enlarged garden gnome. Quite apart from the characteristic inappropriateness of the materials the apparent cost of materials is striking. The display of the materials of addiction and over consumption is in tune with the associations with drink in particular beer in the earlier work.
A car is used in a large installation. The car has a mechanism in it that makes it bounce rhythmically, to give the impression that a couple are having sex inside and bouncing on the seat.
The Bunny Girl is another later work, this is a representation of a playboy bunny girl made from stuffed pantyhose draped on a chair to suggest arms and legs, and a pair of ears and a fluffy tail. This utterly abject object conveys both the idea of a bunny girl astride a punters lap, or straddling a chair and the idea of a woman as flesh encased in nylon tights or even of a sex toy, a toy woman. 
!Luke, Jeff.
British artist born around 1965 died 1996. Luke's sculptures are made essentially from rubbish and throwaway materials, yet they have a strongly formal quality. His sculptures are often on the floor, usually installed and involving a large number of parts, reminiscent of American scatter art of the late 1970s. A number of rubber band balls some about 60 cm in diameter, are arranged on a low plinth, as if they were a Henry Moore or Barbara Hepworth carved stone sculpture. Instead the abstract forms, pebble like shapes, are the result of hours of obsessive activity. Luke took a mindless doodle like activity and expanded the scale to make a sculpture. Cosmetics and toiletries such as hair shampoo and conditioner, cleaning fluids, and other household liquids are places in tiny 2 cm high sample tubes, which are numbered to refer to a key telling the viewer what they contain. These are then placed on a shelf in a row, creating a formal work from the great range of colours of the liquids. 
Other works consist of unidentifiable bits of small rubbish (this quality of anonymity, a sense that the object is a part of the unknown larger whole seeming to be the criteria for selection), placed in a careful arrangement on the floor.

!Lum, Ken.
Canadian artist
!Luna, James.
Born around 1950, Luna is a Native American living on a reservation who is known for his socio-political art projects, which highlight the discrimination against Native American Indians. The best known of his works is a performed installation for which Luna had himself tranquillised and placed in a display case in a museum of native American artefacts during museum opening hours. He remained in the case every day for a month, under close supervision.
!Lyotard, Francois.
The Guerilla Girls
Group of anonymous feminist activists who were working in New York in the late 80s and early 90s, the Guerilla Girls were named for their wearing of gorilla masks when they went organised demonstrations. They also used the banana as an emblem, along with the gorilla suit a prop of slapstick humour and a visual pun on both the diet of gorillas and the offering of an opportunity to institutions who fail to represent women adequately to 'slip up' (on the proffered banana skins). The group is thought to have included a number of members who went on to become prominent artists, for example Sue Williams. The Guerilla Girls were very much a product of an era, when feminism was well established and energy could be turned from discriminatory practises in everyday life, work and the home, to those in culture. The group produced a number of seminal posters and postcards for example a list of reasons 'Why There are no Great Women Artists', and a list of statistics about the proportional representation of women artists in art museums. These texts achieved widespread distribution because they were clever in their use of graphics and advertising to get message across, and because the appearance of the gorilla suited members staging demonstrations at institutions and relevant events was always newsworthy.
!John Martin.
English artist working in the late nineteenth century who painted visionary scenes depicting humankind struggling with the natural world, a kind of inversion of the idea of the sublime. An example is a painting of a towering dark black and brown mountain at night in which a huge chasm opened up, a volcanic eruption spewing out flames sparks and lava into the darkness. Dwarfed by this landscape lots of people are struggling and fleeing from the lava flow and fires.
!Macarthy Paul.
American artist who is well known for his performance work, which is always shown as a video documentation, usually displayed as part of an installation containing the props, set and costumes used in the production of the video. The actual one off performance may be done in front of an audience, but they watch it on a monitor in another room, Macarthy always performing in private. 
Macarthy appropriates folk tales and popular icons, subverting them by renacting the tales transplanted into his own bizarre and usually scatological world. He draws a parallel between everyday activities and the making of art through his parody of  fiction.
Macarthy himself usually features as main protagonist/artist. He always uses theatrical costumes and sets, often using masks and props. For example a work titled Heidi and the Grandfather is loosely based on the story of Heidi, but in McCarthy's hands becomes a tale of child abuse and perverse practices involving faecal obsession. In part of the performance Heidi and the grandfather make sausages from fake faeces extracted from Heidi's prosthetic bottom. Bossy Burger is a horror story involving a chef character who wears a mask and makes burgers. The film makes reference to Sweeny Todd and a lot of tomato ketchup is used (a development from an earlier video in which Macarthy smears himself liberally from head to foot with tomato ketchup). 
A film of a Pinocchio character is shown on a monitor in a large box construction with peepholes which are apparently holes for Pinocchio's nose, and there are Pinocchio costumes complete with noses for the viewer to put on. As ever, in this work Macarthy makes obvious and puerile associations with his chosen subject and lets the various elements collide to disconcerting but humourous effect. He takes the Freudian claim that art is at base no more than playing with ones own excreta absolutely literally.  
Mcarthy notorious for his wittiest creation, De Kooning, also his cruellest and funniest parody of art and the art world, featuring mcarthy visiting a blue chip dealer and also dressed as a tube of paint throwing him self mindlessly against the studio walls, chanting a tuneless ditty 'De Kooonign, De Kooning'. He mocks the art worlds pretensions and contrasts them with the still feted work of the supposedly senile de Koonign. This is perhaps the most extreme example of the way Macarthy focuses on breaking taboos. His comic and clownish portrayal of senility, ketchup and fake faeces smeared over his body and surroundings to mimic blood and shit, scenes of child abuse and indecent or murderous practises: all these are grist to Macarthy's comic tragic mill, his interpretation of the darkest side of human nature as a form of slapstick.  
!Mach David.
Brtistih artist born in the 1950s, Mach became known when he made large sculptures from meticulousy stacked magazines. These monumental scale sculptures developed and Mach began to use other materials, fro example a submarine made from scrapped car tyres, a train made from stacked bricks. Constructed with no fixings, the sculptures have a casual appearance that belies the complexity of their construction, needed to prevent them from collapsing. The sculptures gain their intrinsic strength from the way the stacks are formed and interlinked, but they remain potentially un-fixed and are impermanent despite their bulk and weight. 
!Mackenzie Lucy.
Scottish artist born in the late 1970s, Mackenzie's practise is extensive, ranging from painting, drawing, printmaking and writing, to video, installation, dj-ing, and event organising. She has also used her work to promote the activites of charities, such as one that supports women in Eastern Europe who are trafficked as prostitutes. Mackensies ppolymorphous practise is the result of an ideological and socially engaged approach to art as a medium with the power to transform daily life. At the same time her work references early twentieth century art, particulary that of Russia and Germany both iconographically and in the creation fo social events. Her paintings and works on paper often borrow apparently anachronistic historical graphics style, and have featuring athletes, Olympic rings, and graphic and geometric patterns. Or they may be graffiti like, borrowing from classical art and include text. They are painted in faded out colours, drawn roughly or printed on, often on cheap paper wicih in itself is a symbolic act, as cheap paper and printing methods seem entirely  anachronistic in western Europe today, where they are still the norm in many parts of the world.
In some sense Mackenzie's work reflects the state of the body politic, in other senses it is a reflection on the practise of art. She started a club night in her native Glasgow that was and remains a focus for artists and musicians. She also ran a club in Warsaw with Pauline Olowska, a long term collaborator, at which they presented events including music, poetry and readings. 
A video made in 2003 shows Mackenzie and Olowska working togheter in an empty space. Mackenzie is drawing Olowska who seems to be doing nothing but talking on the phone.
Mackenzie also uses text in her large paintings and painted wall sized murals. 
A recent printed work features a year planner poster for 2004, blank, with all the weekends blocked out in yellow higlgighter pen. 
!Mackie Christina.
Scottish artist born in 1960 who makes sculptures and video which are conceptual cool and restrained and have a poetic minimalism. Mackie might place a monitor showing a piece of road with traffic sounds next to a railway sleeper, or use a telephone which the viewer can pick up and listen to a sound. Monitors are often placed on or situated in constructions made of old timbers.
!Maclean Bruce.
Scottish artist Maclean was born in the 1940s and made his best known work in London in the 1970s and 80s. He made paintings, coulurful gestural abstracts and performances, in which he adopted a persona smoking a pipe and wearing a trilby hat.
!Maclennan Alistair.
A Scottish performance artist working in the late 1970s ande 80s, Maclennan made a controversial work at the Institute of Contemporary art in London in 1981 call Still Tills. Maclennan spent a week living in the gallery eating and sleeping surrounded by food, detritus and waste including bodily waste. The artists body and functions as sculpture. He also sorted through and arranged bags of refuse, which as the press reperoted included sanitary protection and nappies. The title may have been a comment on the end of consumerism and shopping, the beginning of a new self-sufficiency and the artist was trying to show the possibilitiy of this by living without purchasing anything for a week. Other works of Maclennans were similarly time- and often endurance-based. 
!Maddox Brown Ford.
One of the British pre-Raphaelite painters, Maddox Brown made less stylised paintings than Rosetti, for example a painting of a goat in a barren landscape light by a lurid setting sun, using orange and purple and green.
!Magill Elisabeth.
British/Scottish painter born in 1960s who made a series of paintings of luggage seen through an airport security x-ray machine. Later work includes paintings of trees.
!Magritte Rene.
Magritte is perhaps the most famous of the Surrealists, and indeed is one of the best known artists in the world. A French painter born in 1850, Magritte's images are instantly recognisable and attributable, and have been much copied. They have influenced adviseritisng imagery for several decades and continue to do so. 
Magritte was interested in puns both visual and textual, for ezxample, 'Ceci n'est pas une pipe' - 'this is not a pipe' is inscribed on a painting of a pipe. Many of his paintings feature both words and objects often the objects are apparently named but the names do not make sense. In this way Magrittes text paintings are both object and subject in the sense that are what they are but the viewer is then told that they are not, leading them to a new consideration of what they are seeing and of what art might do.
Examples of paintings without text are a train emeergin from a fireplace, an apple obscuring most of the front of a bowler hatted man's face, an inverted mermaid: with a fish's head and woman's legs and pelvis, an easel by a window with a painting on it, the painting showing the view through the window, two grey spaceship like objects titled 'Floating Spheres', and a man's face which is also a female torso in which the pubic hair is also the man's beard. These are painted in a highly realistic but flat and stiff style, with a muted palette, smooth, flat and few brushstrokes. The ludicrous juxtapositions of objects and people are nonetheless poetic and leave the viewer hopgin that they might actually happen, that the everyday might mix up and become magical, in other words surreal.
!Maillot Auguste.
French late nineteenth century sculptor working in bronze and stone, who made solid and rounded mostly female figures with distinctively simply formed bodies, even the smaller works have a kind of naïve but monumental quality. 
!Malevitch Kasimir.
Russian suprematist painter who painted the famous 'Black Square' in 1910. This work is often attributed with being the beginning of abstraction. The painting is simply a square canvas painted black all over. Square canvases were very unusual since they did not lend themselves to the traditional subjects of paitnign, landscapes and portraits, by which names the two most common proportions of paintings were known. The square drew attention to the work itself, not the subject of the work, so that the painting as an object, about painting, rather than as a depiction of something became important. Mondrian was soon using the square format. 
Malevitchs paitnign was entirely black which drew attention to the only possible detaisl of his work, the colour fo the black and the brushstrokes, in fact the viewer was directedt to regard the nature of paint and painting in this work. This may have been more than malevich intended, for the work emerged as a result of his systematic attention to consturctivits principles of which it was a logical if daring conclusion. Other works emplyed the geometry, sharp edged straight lines and primary colours of constructivism, a movement whose members used these principles to construc abttract works. Consturcitvism had a great influence on and was influenced by contemporary graphic design and typography, and is still evident in design today. 
!Maloney Martin.
British artist and former curator who pioneered 'bad painting' in the late 90s, making very large scale monumental figurative works often based on other paintings for example poussin, for which he used friends and acquaintances as models in a highly ambitious kitchen sink meets Alez katz style. He also painted still lives and animals, as well as a painting cycle of gay club scenes. Maloney's work is distinguished by the speed at which he works painting wet on wet with large brushes at speed, rarely spending more that 6 hours on a work. The resulting faux clumsiness was highly controversial but Maloney is representative of a generation of artists who began to make work in hitherto scorned media such as textiles, the so called 'dumb' art which combined a knowing intellectualism with great enthusiasm and joy in materials and a freedom from the tyranny of conventional artistic skills.
Maloney curated several seminal exhibitions in his own home, including Lost in Space and Die Yuppie Scum and his 'you can do it if you really want to' attitude to success in the art world, combined with a willingness to combine the classical with the trashy made him very successful in the 1990s. He works chiefly in oils, but also in watercolour, sticky tape and ceramics.
!Man Ray.
A French surrealist sculptor painter and photographer working in paris in the early twentieth century. Man Ray used various photographic methods including placing objects on light sensitve plates and then explosing them to get an image. Man Ray took the well known photograph of Duchamp with a star shaved out of the back of his head smoking a pipe. 
!Manet Edouard.
A French artist who is often described as the father of impressionism, Manet painted in a realistic way but used paint expressively. More than any artist at that point in time he openly used the recently invented photograph in making his work. This had a profound effect, in particular on composition. Taking an interest in the way a photograph cropped a scene and noting the difference for a painter who can choose what to include and where, moving things in and out of the frame, Manet began to compose his canvases in the same way, giving them an immediately new look. Prominent among artist of the mid 19th century in paris Manet was friends with Courbet, Degas, Monet. 
Manet painted two very well known works, Olympia, and Dejeuner Sur L'Herbe, as well as Bonjour Monsieur Courbet and the Bar at the Folies Bergere. This last is often cited by artists as an important inspiration in their own work, it is a very original painting which depicts a bar at the Folies Bergere night club, visited and painted by many of his contemporaries, behind which is a woman serving. On closer inspection it is actually the reflection in the mirror behind the bar, Manet has taken this mirror as the edge of his painting and thus we see the woman's back, some of people at the bar and the bottles which are in front of the mirror. 
Manet's paintings were startlingly new and inventive. His Olympia (based on a historical paintgin of the same subject) was shocking and provoked storms of protests. It was rejected from the paris salon, the official body of recognition for artists, as being pornographic and the public was outraged. Olympia is depicted nude, reclining on a couch, with her maid and a cat behind her. She wears a ribbon choker and earrings and seems to be a prostitute. However what was provoked outrage was look on the woman's face - she stares out of the canvas at the viewer, actively acknowledging their presence and thus making them a subject of the work. This was revolutionary, and brought the whole history of the depiction of the female nude in art into question - here was a woman who meet the viewer's gaze rather than allowing the viewer unchallenged access to her body in passive acquiescence.
Dejeuner Sur L'Herbe, also a reworking of a historical painting, provoked a similar response but soon these two paintings were acknowledged as groundbreaking works. Dejeuner Sur L'Herbe shows a group of young men and women picnicking in the woods, one of the women is naked, reclining casually and staring out at the viewer from the centre of the canvas. The gaze of some of the others is also focused out of the picture plane at the viewer.
Bonjour Monseiur Courbet is painting in which Manet acknowledges his debto to Courbet. He shows himelf walking alond a country lane, greeting the passing Courbet. 
!Mantegna Andrea.
An Italain renaissance painter. Mantegna invented painting technique grisaille.
!Manzanelli Margarita.
An Italian painter born in 1970s who paints young women, often emaciated but fashionably dressed, in the middle of a large canvas with a plain flat background. the women are characterised by their monochrome flat backgrounds, thin bodies and large often bulging eyes.
!Mapplethorp Robert.
A photographer working in New York in the 1980s and early 90s, Mapplethorp became notorious for his photographs of gay men. The men are often naked or semi-clothed, and the images sexually unambiguous such as Man in a Polyester Suit which shows an African-american man in the eponymous suit resting his penis on a stool, and another photograph showing a man urinating into another's mouth, both men dressed in leather. 
Photographs like these led to Mapplethorp being attacked by the Christian right and his exhibitions were denounced as pornography. The fact that museums spent public money on exhibiting Mapplethorp's work led to a full scale row in the United States senate and other artists were dragged into the debate. Senator Jesse Helms led the attack supported by The Association for the American Family and religious organisations. The result was a substantial decrease in the amount of support given to artists by the National Endowment for the Arts, the United States government arts subsidy fund. The exisiting obscenity laws were reassessed there was a call for a revision of the censorship laws in order to make it easier to close an exhibition or require special conditions to be met. 
There were many counter claims, not just by Mapplethorp, of discrimination on the grounds of sexuality. Mapplethorp said of his work that he photographed images of love and trust, and that even the most 'sado masochistic' of his images represented supreme trust, love and vulnerability on the part of the participants. His defenders claimed that if his images were of heterosexual couples there would have been no such outcry.
The case went to court and a ruling was made that the photographs defined as obscene could only be exhibited in a specially constructed screened off area, with a clear indication to the public of the contents of the these works. The case increased the public interest in the work and made Mapplethorp one of the best known photographers in the world.
Mapplethorp's themes were (like many of the gay artists in a period in which so many were lost to AIDS related illnesses), love, sex and death. He made many self portraits the best known of which shows him wearing a leather biker jacket with chains and a leather cap. Antoher shows Mapplethorp as a young man standing on a fire escape with the singer Patti Smith. A photograph taken just before his death, shows a visibly frail Mapplethorp holding a cane topped with a skull and crossbones emblem which owes an allegiance to Warhol's late self portraits. 
Mapplethorp made a series of photographs of flowers, mostly lilies and other exotic flowers, which are also sexual images. These are sometimes reminiscent of Georgia O'Keefe paintings, the photographs are usually black and white but some are colour.
Mapplethorp also photographed the body builder Lisa Lyon, whose physique he considered to be perfect. He made commissioned portraits, for which he was much sought after by the rich and famous.
Robert Mapplethorp died of AIDS related illness in 1994.
!Marclay Christian.
US artist born 1957, Marclay worked as a muscian and DJ before becoming an artist as well. Starting from his interest in music, Marclay makes video, sound and works on paper. A 2003 installation consisted of 6screen projectikon arranged in a horizontal row, composed of film clips. Thses were chosen from a huge range of films, documentaries, news footage, and chosen for a particular sound (pitch and qualtity of sound) as well as for the image. Thus a singing marilyn, marching feet, shouting, piano player, almost any thing is sampled and used. Marclay built the resulting samples into a complex musical score, 15 minutes long which is 'played' by the film clips. The viewer is engaged in a compelling set of responses to whqt they hear and see, having to match sound to image and also to process reponses to the image, many of which are consciously or subconsciously recognised. The urge to find a narrative is continually denied, and the viewer is forced to recognise the sound as the narrative instead.
!Marden Brice.
Amercian painter of minimal abstract works, who made large (at least 2 by 3 often) cancvase painted entirely usually muted colurs very often grey with one or two contrasting coloured stripes often on the edge of the canvas. Marden's work has similar formal qultities to the work of Barnet Newman, although where Newmans work is painterly, Mardern's is hard edged and painted with flat solid colour. Marden used a lot of grey, black and netral colours.
!Maria Walter de la.
Known for his permanent installation Lightning Field 1987, in Arizona in US, a specific area which has the highest frequency of lightning strikes in the world in which he set out a square mile of lightning conductor poles linked by conductive wires. When struck the field becomes a spectacle of blue light and electrical activity. 
!Marinetti Frederico.
The leading member of the Italian Futurist movement, Marinetti was an eccentric didact who Produced many painting, the best known one depicting a kind of elephant hoover construction. His many published texts include several manifesti. He wrote a Futurist Cookbook which contains feasible recipes including several for pasta, but also some very inedible and often ironic ones inlvoving rose petals for example, with complicated presentation methods. The cookbook is a glimpse into the suprising romanticism of the futuristic movement. Marinetti declared pasta to be the most important (and futurist) of all food. 
Marinetti made several performance works including one in which a set of dining chairs were made to dance on and off the stage. 
!Marker Chris.
Very influential British underground filmmaker working from the 1970s onwards, whose work is often a collage of images and film clips. Marker's films are presented as an installation. For example one work is shown on a tower of monitors placed one on top of the other, the same film playing on each but at a different point, so that the images are never the same.
!Marshall Maria.
A British artist born around 1968. Marshall has made a number of video films featuring her own children, including one of her son smoking. 
!Marshall Mike.
A Britisih artist born in 1970s, Marshall has made a number of films  of banal everyday scenes, including a film of a water sprinkler in a garden. The viewer watches the green leaves of the hedge and the waxing and waning of the spray droplets as they sparkle in the sun. Marshall brings a kind of everyday sublime to the viewer's attention, producing moments of abstract beauty and contemplation from unexpected sources. 
!Martin Agnes.
A painter born about 1930 who made the work for which she is best known in the 1950s and 60s. Martin's minimal abstract paintings are usually based on a grid, mainly white with pencil thin lines of bright colours, which are barely perceptible from a distance. The paintings are cool, calm and full of light, and rigourous in their exectuion.
!Martin Simon.
Brisths artist born in 1968 whose highly finished conceptual painting and sculpture is concerned with the nature of art. He has made a photorealist painting of a bright red tree frog, a painted fibreglass repkcia of a carved and painted wooden bird in relief, that is based on an original wood carving, and a laquered fibreglass sculpture of a toy monkey's head, enlarged to about 4 feet in diameter and sprayed in off white gloss paint. His work is laborious and labour intensive, the results of his labour producing luxurious objects which have no clear purpose, making the viewer think about them as art objects. He has also made other conceptual work which is opposite in its choicie of more ephemeral materials such as cardboard boxes. 
!Martini Simone.
Italiain renaissance painter.
!Matisse Henri.
A French painter and sculptor, Matisse is considered one of the greatest artist in the world. His paintings include the famous Dance, an 8 metre by 3 metre panoramic painting of dancing female nudes, renowned for its semi abstraction. The pink figures become rhythmic arabesques on the swirling blue ground. Matisse later made The figures into paper cut-outs, a form in which he was prolific in later life, using ultramarine paper collaged onto a white ground. 
Along with the Snail, a large 4 by 3 metre collage made of a spiral of squares of different brightly coloured pieces of paper within a yellow collaged frame, these cut-out became perhaps Matisse's best known work, their graphic simplicity lending itself well to printed reproduction. The blue dancers, their heavy limbs creating a calligraphic pattern, are one fo the most reconisable works by a twentieth century artist.
Matisse also did a large number of drawings and had an assured hand, creating very simple drawings often using one continous line. However it is for his figurative painting that he is most greatly respected, his use of drawing within a painting, the way he allowed a drawn edge to define the pictorial space and function both as part of an object or structure and part of the composition, and similarly the way in which he left areas of the canvas unpainted, allowing the white of the ground to function as part of the image. 
Matisse painted restful, joyous and domestic subjects in an entirely unsentimental and in fact highly intellectual way. The composition was daring, as in the Piano Lesson, a predominantly green and red painting with large blocks of colour, entirely figurative but which nevertheless has an abstract sensibility. It is probably the use of colour which singles him out, for example in the woman with a green face, a head and shoulders portrait in which the shadow of the woman's hat over her face is painted in a swoop of emerald green. In this way Matisse was translating what his eye say literally into paint, the substance of paint.
Anothre of his great paintings depicts a goldfish in a bowl on a table by a French window opening onto a tiny balcony. The window and room are boldly outlined in black, the goldfish bowl is painted minimally yet very convincingly. The Red Studio is a particularly daring work, showing the furniture and objects in his studio outlined in white (made simply by leaving the canvas white where he wanted the line to be) and some colour, with minimal perspsective, but chiefly this is a red square of canvas with objects floating on it. 
He also made a number of bronze casts, the best known of whcih is the triptych The Back, an abstracted human torso viewed from the back, carved in relief as semi cylindrical shapes to represent the two sides of the back and the buttocks, leaving a space in the middle to represent the division caused by the spine. The sculptures were commissioned for a specific interior and were thus made as three bronze wall reliefs. 
!Matta Clark Gordon.
American artist born in 1940s working from 1960s onwards. Matta Clark is best known for his work House, a suburban clapboard house which the artist cut in two vertically down the centre. The two halves lean outwards and away from each other. Matta Clark made a number of other works  whih involved cutting through buildings, for example a project at the opening of the Pompidou Centre in Paris he cut several circular and elliptical holes through a nearby building that was about to be redeveloped. Although major in terms of their execution, Matta Clarks interventions are visually extremely simple.  
Maugham Karl
Painter of intensely detailes flower beds, every flower given individual attention, on large canvases. Born 1960s, works in London
!May Nicholas.
A british painter born 1962, May made a serious of large paintings in which he poured large pools of paint, often house paint, while the canvas was on the floor, and tipped them to manouever the paint and allowing them to dry. He ofrten used different colours together, pouring one into the other, wet on wet, including metallic colours and powders. The resulting slick of paint would form the painting, its surfrace very enticing. May made a number of these during the 1990s, after which he ceased to make art. 
!Mazcuga Goshka.
Polish artist living and working in London born 1970, Mazcuga makes environments in which she curates exhibitions. She may create a cave within a gallery from crumpled brown paper, or a snowy mountain scape from fabric, and fill this space with the work of artists that she has invited to participate. Her work as an artist is the exhibition environment that she has created. 
!McComb Len.
British artist born around 1940. Len McComb mainly makes large scale pencil drawings, for example a sequence of cliff faces on the Anglesey coastline drawn on a number of pieces of paper tiled together to make a wall-sized drawing. 
!McCracken, John.
Briths artist who makes minimal abstract sculptures. Plank and cube shaped objects made to a high gloss laquereed finish in a soldi colours. The planks (about 3 metres long, 50 cm wide and 12 cm deep) typically lean against the gallery wall. Other sculptures are hung from the wall.
!McQueen Steve.
Britihs artist born 1960s who works in film and Video. Mcqueens films have a wide range of subjects but share basically sculptural concerns. Bear, made for his post graduate show in 1993, shows two men wrestling naked, shot from below in slight slow motion. Antoher shows a tightrobpe walker shot from below, so that we focus on the soles of the feet in special shoes, wobbing on the wire. In both these films by choosing an unusual viewpoint McQueen chages our perception fo these spectator acitiviites and shows the effort requrtied to carry them out. In 2001 a film shows McQueen standing before a wooden barn, which subseaqently falls apart, the roof collapsing and the walls falling outwards. As it falls, it seems that McQueen will be squashed by the front of the barn but in fact he is standing at the exact spot over wich the window falls, leaving him standin with the window opening around him, unscathed. In 2003 he made two more abmbitious works The Deep which he filmed in a mine in south Africa, and the Leap which showed young boys jumping off a clff. The Deep takes us down to the coal face in the lift and films at eh coal face, using available light and ambient sound. The result is often exteremely and hard to see, with no illumination save the miners head lamps and creates the impression of a kind of hell. The film sulminates in a sequence shot in the miners shower and clocking out hall where each mans temperature is taken. 
As well as seeking new ways to look at things and investignatng the visual perceptions associated with sound, McQueens wrok deals with race and the representaion of race in art cinema and photography atlhoguth he does not claim this for his work. The Deep does this explicityly, but Bear and the Falling Barn are more sublte. The barn is based on part of a Charlie Chaplin film in which the same thing happens. 
!1Meese Jonathan.
german artist born around 1970 meese made a number of works in which he covered the walls and ceiling of the exhibition space with a vast quantitiy of found material, photographs, drawings, images from magazines, in fact any visual material. Discernable themes might emerge. The effect was that of a teenage bedroom vastly expanded, with adult subjectg matter. Sometimes the material might be sent by post to the gallery by the artist, and the gallery left to mount it on the wall as they wished. 
!Mellor Dawn.
British artist born 1960s paints women usually dressed up, generic women or famous women. For a long time Mellors paintings were very small and displayed in groups, subsequently she began to make bigger works. 
!Merz Mario.
Italian painter born in 1940s made scultures and wall based works always incorporating some illuminated neon tubing. For example and igloo like structure with neon on floor. Paintings with neon arrows.
!Merz Tania.
British painter born 1960s
!Messerschmitt.
German artist 1890s who made a series of small exquisitely modelled  heads cast in bronze, about 10cms across, a male head with a number of different expressions, often the features are contorted. The heads are titled by the mood or emotion the face is displaying. Messerschmitt influendce by contemporary developments in psychologly, and other therapeutic and diagnostic methods fo the day.
!Michaux Henri.
French artist (dead) who makes small obsessive drawings and written works, dense scribblings, extremely intricate patterns and landscapes, letters to anonymous recipients written in the smallest of hands, sometimes blanked out after writing. Michaux mainly used pen and ink, often brown ink. His work was made under the influence of mescalin, which Michaux believed allowed the user make use of otherwise inaccessible parts of the imagination. Michaux's work occupies an odd space in the history of art since it could be compared to outsider art (for example the art of the insane) yet Michaux's altered state of consciousness was self induced.
!Michelangelo.
Italian artist working in Florence in the renaissance period, Michaelangelo is universally known as one of the greatest artists of all time. In fact his name is often used to invoke the idea of the highest achievement in art. Michelangelo is most famous for his white marble sculture David, an oversized nude with which he claimed to have represented perfoction in the male form. Ncihelagnleo is equally well known for the roof of the Sistine Chapel, Michelangelos was a very skilled draughtmena and created very lifelike figures, and he used colour in a very realistic way. The Sistine chapel ceiling was an enourmous undertaking, it is a fresco showing the life of Christ and the ascnesion into heaven. Images from the ceilign are known all over the world, often used by advertisers, and have become almost generic. One part of the ceilin in particular is arpticluarly popular, the image of Chirst reaching out his finger to god, who does the same, and their fingers nearly touch. This is an image of great tension and portent, and it seems as if an electrical charge passes from one to the other throught their fingers. In the late 1990s the ceiling was cleaned, provoking a great deal of controversy since for centuries the fresco had been darkenedn and the colours muted. The fresco had been known to visitors and to those looking at reprocutions as an antique, parts of which were even obsdured from view by centuries of dirt and the breath of millions of visitors. The cleaned ceilnig was very brightly coloured even garish. 
Mihcelangleos also made a marble sucultre of the Pieta.
!Millais John Everett.
British painter working in the late nineteenth century.
!Miller Alain.
Bristih artist born around 1960 who paints highly realistic images (for example a heart or a brain) which from a part of a larger abstract composition.
!Milroy Lisa.
Britsih artist born around 1960 how makes figurative painting. Milroy's work is essentially still life but there is an element of process painting in her work. She often paitns multiple versions fo the same type of object, set out in rows that cover the whole picture plane, for example shoes or blue and white porcelain plates, with the effect of standardising everything she chooses to paint both in terms fo the genre of thing, and in terms of the relation of one type to another. So that car tyres might be treated in the same way as jewellery. 
The objects in Milroys paintings are painted in consistent way, with simple flowing brushctokes on a flat colour ground, in realistic colours. They look very real viewed from a distance, close to the canvas the paint and brushstrokes are what the eye focuses on.  
!Mir Aleksandra.
Polish artist born in the 1960s who works in New York. Mirs work comprises socially engaged installation and events, combined with the consrtuctcion fo large site specific or temporary scultupres. 
Mir often chooses to respond to a location or a situation. For example she sited a military tank paitned pink on a disused lot in London, where local children play. The tank was photographed with women and girls dressed in pink draped over it in an ironic take on the female military mascot. 
Mir has made a work based on the Mir space station, and most recently has made an almost life size inflatable jumbo jet which can be sited anywhere. 
!Miro Juan.
Spanish painter working in the early twentieth century. Miro was one of the early abstract painters and his paintings are instantly recognisavle. Miro uses amorphouse shapes reminiscent of microscopic life forms. These are very often black, sometimes red and blue, and verge on the figurative. The ground of the paintgins is raw linen or very thinly prepared. Miro's found inspiration in cartoon narratives, in particular the American Krazy Kat, and in banal objects juxtaposed in strange ways. In this he was closer to the surrealists. Miro made many collages using images from catalogues such as knives, tools and machinery. These were often mixed with elements from cartoon strips and then abstracted to produce his paintings. 
!Miss Mary.
American artist bron in the late 1940s who made a number of earthwork sculptures, for example a cube shaped void sunk into the ground its top exactly level with the surface, entered on ramps from ground level. She subverted minimal sculptural forms being made by her contemporaries by making them absolyutley concrete but invisible. 
!Miyajima Tatsuo.
Japenese artist working from the late 1980s onwards who has made a large number of works using LED displays. A series of works use small LED units placed on the floor or on the wall, showing a very high number which is contstalnly changing. This number is in fact the date and time diplayed in fractions fo a second. 
!Modigliani Ernesto.
Italian artist working in late nineteenth and early twentieth century whose name is always associated with a certain type of portrait. Typcially a Modigliani protrati will show a seated woman with an elongated body, and a stylised face. Modiglanis work is quite, contemplative and painted in a sombre palette.
!Moholy Nagy Lazlo.
Hungarian artist who was a contemporary of the surrealists. Moholy Nagy made a number of pioneering semi-abstract films and photographs using architectural form, light and shade. 
!Mondrian Piet.
Dutch landscape painter painting his local countryside, trees and canals. Began to abstract these scenes and simplify his palette also experimenting with canvas shape, for example made a series of abstract works on oval canvases bases on trees in a snowy landscape conveyed as geometric grey and brown marks on a white ground. Working in the early 1900s he made a series of works on small square canvases painted in red, yellow, blue, white and black. These works became among the most famous abstract paintings in the world. He divided the canvas into irregular blocks and used black lines to bisect them and outline them. These works are largely untitled.
Later Mondrian began to paint patterns using smaller units and areas, for example 'Who's Afraid of Red, Yellow and Blue?' 1910 and one titled Subway which are a homage to the architecture and the new jazz scene of New York. Mondrian's abstract geometric compositions owe something to contemporary Russian constructivists but are significant for their abstraction of landscape into pure geometric form.
!Monet Claude.
French painter born in the 1840s, Monet is the best known of the Impressionists, and indeed made the painting which gave the movement its name: Impression:Sunrise, a view of the houses fo parliament and the fiver thames in London. This is a small paitning of the river at sunrise, the water reflecting the oranges and pinks of the sun which is painted as a small orange circle. This painting was remarkable for its vagueness in terms fo detail, and for the consideration fo the nature of the painted surface, so that the sun could ve read both as a sun and as a painted circle. The English painter whlistler, who was not a fan, claimed the aptingin to be a 'naïve daubing'. 
Along with Matisse and Picasso, on whom he was influential, Monet considered one of the greatest artists in the world nad the three together to be the founders of modernism and 20th century painting. Alongside the advent of photography and its apparent challenge to the painter to paint what the eye could see as axactly as possible, Monet championed a different approach. He was trying to paint an impression of what he saw, as if with eyes half shut, and it is possible that he got this idea through seeing out of focus iphotographic mages. After all the idea of a deliberately blurred image was a radically new one at the time and Monets dead changed the aims of painters everywhere. Monet took from Cezanne the idea that an artist might paint what was in front of him but paint less that he actullly saw, aiming to reproduce the essence of the view. To this end he developed a very distincdtiv eparinting style breaking the subject he paiting into patches of colour, applied without covering the ground of the canvas, using the uncovered white ground to create a shimmering effect. He used colour to paint light as well as solid forms.
Monet made several important groups of works. The Water liliy paintings made at his country home in Giverny, the façade of Rouen cathedral, and the haystacks.  
The water lilies series are largely 3 m by 4 m semi abstract canvases which depict a pond or lake with with water lilies on it using shades of emerald, ultramarine and violet, with bright pink and red highlights on the usually white lilies. The way the paint is applied to construct the image is almost of as much importance as the image itself.
A series of paintings of the façade of the cathedral at Rouen was a detailed exercise in and demonstration of impressionist technique. In these works the surface of the painting is encrusted with multicouloured paint which is visible as a façade only at a distance. There are an immense variety of paintings which represent and exaggeratd different light conditions. Monet was unique in his preference for continual repetition of views of the same subject. He also painted hay stacks series, notable for their pale blue and lilac shadows, a houses of parliament and Thames series,
Although best known for these series of large scale paintings, Monet made a large number of one off works preceding these. 
Impressionism did not impress the paris salon, leading to the formation of the Salon des Refusés, a place for all those artists rejected by the Salon to exhibit. It soon became recognised that these rejected artists were changing painting for ever and that they were the avant garde
!Moore Henry.
British artist born at the beginning of the twentieth century. Moore began as a figurative sculptor, but later became a pioneer of semi-abstract sculptural form in Britian, and made many public commissions. Like his peer Barbara Hepworth, Moore's sculptures often have holes through them and hollows; he too was interested in representing the 'void' sculpturally. He worked in stone, bronze, and clay. Unlike his contemporaries, however Moore did not make smooth surfaced works. His roughly modelled sculptures are like giant bones, and always refer clearly to the human form. For example a reclining nude (a favourite form for Moore) might be abstracted to from a series of voids and hollows, as if it were a piece of driftwood that had been worn away. A standing figure might have a large space where the belly would have been. Heads are featureless and the proportions of the body adjexted to suit the form that Moore was trying to achieve.
Moore's sculptures are often sited in rural landscapes and parks, and indeed it was the way in which the human form could look as if it were part of and came from the landscape, and the landscape seen through the sculpture, that interested Moore. A late example of this is an arch (around 1960) made for a lakeside site in Hyde Park in London which seems to be constructed of three monumnetla bones, two standing on their ends, the other balancing across the two.
Moore made a large number of drawings both as preparatory sketches and in their own right. His drawings are realistic and anatomically accurate. As well as drawging the figure, he made a notable series of impressions of people sheltering from bombs in an underground station during world war two.
!Morandi Giorgio.
Italian early twentieth century artist who mostly painted still lives, depicting simple domestic objects such as jugs, bottles and vases on plain coloured grounds.
!Morison Paul.
British artist born in the early 1960s who began his career in the late 1990s painting trees, flowers and vegetation in silhouette. Morison's paintings are nearly all made in balck on white, showing meticulously drawn plants and trees of varying scale made into a composition, which are paitnged by hand absolutely flat and hard edged in black acrylic paint on white. He has occaisionally made negative versions in white on black. Morisons paintings are usually around 2 metres high, and he has also made round ones. His wall paintings often span 20 metres.
!Morisot Berthe.
French artist working in the late nineteenth century. Morisot is best known for her portraits and drawings, as well as for being one fo the few women artists working consistently in this period.
!Morris Robert.
American Sculptor working from the 1960s to the 1980s who was known for his use of fabricated steel and other metals. Morris made abstract minimal sculptures which were nearly always cube box shapes, about 1.5 meters high, open at the top. His series of copper plated boxes shown as a group are particularly well known, as well as a similar series made of mirrored glass. The copper boxes emit a glowing pink reflected light from their interiors. These are contradictiory works in terms of their representation of a heavy solid for by means of emptiness and light.
Morris also made sculpture with heavy weight felt, including scatter works. He performed in a live work made with Carolee Schneemna in the 1970s title Olympia, in wihc Schneeman posed as the woman in Manets eponymous painting, and Morris dressed in a white robe and wearing leather work gloves, carried large plywood boards around, arranging them as a backdrop to Schneeman. Both performers wore white makeup. The piece was about the 'work' of art, about the male artist and the female model and about the translation from two to three dimensions, the boards representing 'planes'. 
!Morris Sarah.
American artist born in the 1960s who paints process based geometric pattern works based on the facades of modernist buildings. Morris photographs these mostly glass and metal framed buildings whose main feature is windows, and reduces the resulting grid, distorted due to the perspective of the original photograph, to its basic elements in a compouter programme. The grid is painted in one colour, often white, and the 'windows' in a number of colours, usually very bright, to create a grid pattern with a nod to Mondrain and to Bridget Riley, although it is more complex and colourful. Morris uses high gloss paint very precisely applied. The paintings (and similar screen print panel seires) are about 3 m high and 4 m wide at their largest. 
Morris also makes films showing the kind of architecture and city that inspires her work, for example a film shot in Miami.
!Mortimer Justin.
Britsh artist born in the 1960s who paints portraits and has painted the Queen. His paintings are realistic but one part of the image is often blurred or expressionistically painted.
!Mossman Anna.
Britsih artist born about 1960 who takes photographs in which she represents sensory experiences or thought processes. In a photograph of a rose the rose is out of focus as if the viewer had leaned close enough to smell the roses perfume. A series of photographs show people who are out of focus to the most extreme degree. For these photographs Mossman asked her subjects to stay in a room alone with the camera which was set to take a very long exposure. The sitters were to tell the camera a secret. The resulting image is blurred due the movement of the sitter during the telling of the secret, the blurring varying from person to person.
!Motherwell Robert.
Amercian abstract expressionist painter who made very large paintings often using a lot of black paint with gestural brushstrokes made with large brushes and other areas left bare.
!Mueck Ron. 
Bristihs sculptor born in the 1950s who after a career in film industry prosthetics began to make sculpture. Dead Dad brought him to public attention, a life size model of apparetly of his own dead father, made with such detail that it appeared to be real. Mueck's bear's comparison with that of Duane Hanson in the 1960s but the difference is that Mueck experiments with scale and his figures are often naked.
Mueck makes his sculptures from fibreglass which is painted and human hair applied strand by strand. He has also made a baby, a 6 meter high pregnant woman, a school girl (clothed), a post Partum woman lying on her back with her child placed on her stomach, the umbilicus emerging from her vagina still attached to the baby and a man in a boat.
Mueck's sculptures are so realistic as to cease to provoke amazment after a while, since there is no doubt of their perfection. Instead Mueck wants the viewer to confront the human state which each work represents - death, pregnancy, childbirth, childhood - by presenting sometihgn as close to life as possible. 
!Mueller Otto.
German artist working in the early twentieth century.
!Munch Edvard.
Nrowgian artist working in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries who painted one fo the most famous modern paintings fo all time, The Scream. This iconic painting is used extensively in advertising and the media today and has been stolen several times.
Munck had a very distinctive painting style, which ahs the appearnanc of a woodcut at times, outlining his figures and following the outline with the colours of the backgroung on some occasisions. He used strong and often acid colours, but on other occasions used soft colours and monochrome. 
In The Scream, Munch suggested both the soujnd of the scream and the emtoion that engendered it. The figure of a screaming person dressed in black, shocked eyes, hands to open mouth, is seen on a jetty, surrounded by raditating lines of bright colours that seem to represent the soucnd of the scream. The Scream was painted around the same time that Freud's theories of hysteria and the unconsciouss were becoming known. This had an influence on many artists, including Munch.
Subjects were either rural Norwegian lanscape or people, and his landscapes were nearly always poplulated. There is often a dreamlike qulatiy to Munch's work, as if nothing were quite real. The sun is often a stange colour, shadows are distorted, and elements are coloured unnaturally. The people in Munchs work always seem to be or to feel that they are alone. 
A painting of a lake has a setting sun, the refelction of which is a thckly applied vertical yellow stripe. In a lithograph called The Singer of a woman dressed in balck in a room with a piano the only colour is in the woman's bright red hair.
!Muniz Vik.
Brazilian artist who makes unconventional paintings. Muniz's paintings are usually made from newpaper or other photographs which he collects obbsessively, for example he made a series of works in which he used treacle to copy welll known images such as Jackson Polliock making a painting, which try to be the most basic form of illusion in terms of making a recognisable image.
!Munoz Juan.
Spanish artist born in the 1950s who died in 2001. Munoz, who was Spain's best known artist of the end of the twentieth centyr, made scuolture and installation. One of Munoz's last works was a very large scale installation at Tate Modern in London. Several 'elevators' were constructed which ascend and descen through a false floor. Viewers can see the elevators from the basement level and from above, and watch them ascending in space, in a way that they would never usually be seen. The movement of the elevators echoes that of the pistons of a huge slow engine. 
!Muntdean and Rosenblum.
Artist partners working in the late 90s and early 2000s in London who make collavborative paintings depciign usually young people in social siturations conversing. Their speech is written on the painting. Muntdean and Rosenblum's style is strongly graphic, with flat colours, and balck outlines and white backgrounds are characteristic.
!Murdoch Sadie.
Bristih artist born in mid 1960s who began making large paitings in the early 1990s based on modernist architecture, specificaolly interiors, which she drew out on a white grounhd, usually in black and grey, partially painted using very thin paint, and then partially destroyued by pouring thin paint over the whole. In the 2000s Murdoch began to make architectural models from card and paper which she again partially destroyed. Later models are more abstract and remain intact. Murdochs inetest in the modernist project in art and architecture has led to explore both abstract expressionism and architecture particularly the work of Le Corbusier. 
!Murikame Takahashi.
Takahashi is a Japanese painter who makes Highly decorative intricate and stylised floral paintings made in a flat style which make refernec to traditional Japanese patined or woven screens, but are also distintctively modern even futuristic. Brightly coloured, meticulously painted and highly controlled, the paintings have a strongly graphic quality which makes them difficult to contextulisel. 
Murray Elizabeth
US artist who made wall reliefs and constructions that she called three dimensional paintings in the 1970s and 70s. 
!Musgrave David.
British artist born in the 1960sbwho makes installations, Musgrafves work is essentially a sculptural representation of paint and the painted surface. He cuts out various thicjknesses of plastic and other sheet materials, transpartent and opaque, to look as if they are poured pools of colour and places them on the floor, overlaying them. The cutouts are complex shapes, as if liquid has been splashed or dropped, creating multicouloured floor pieces. Musgrave has also made a number of wall reliefs which are enlarged brushstrikes, modelled and cast and painted in high gloss. The mostly incidental shape and texture of the paint, the blob, the stroke is made into the a veryt deliberate ovbject. 
!Muybridge Eadweard.
An American photographer working at the turn fo the century who Pioneered the use of sequential exposrures to photograh a specific action, for example to show the components of the movement of a naked walking man and of a galloping horse. Muybridge's work had a distinctive influence on artists of the turn of the century. In the days before moving pictures, no one had foreseen that movement could be represented photgrpahically, reduced to a sequence of still images, or been ableto study movement. Muybridge's images became instally recognisable.

!Nash Paul.
Bristih artist who was painting during and after the first world war. Nash showed barren landscapes of the trenches and no-mans land in a slightly surrealist light, favou rtgin greens and browns and his charactierist geometric and skeletal shapes. An atmostphere of death pervades his paintings. 
!Nauman Bruce.
Amercian artist who began his career in the 1960s making performance, installation, sculpure and video work. In fact Nauman made some of the earliest video art, in the days when the technology was new and only TV broadcast equipment was available. This was bulky and heavy, and editing equipment was not readlkyl available. Nauman was also one fo the first artists to consider the TV monitor as an art object in itself, as seen in his seminal corridor piece. This consits of two 4 metre high freestanding white walls, placed nect ot each other with a gap in between. The walls are at a slight angle so that the gap between them narrows gradually until it is the width of a monitor which shows only white interference. The viewer approaches the work from the wider end, the light form the monitor creates a hypnotic effect so that the viewer feels compelled to enter the corridor and walk as far as they can before they no longer fit the space. In some ways the piece represents the familiar tunnel with a white light at the end that is often described by those who have had a near death experience. 
IN the 60s and 70s, Naumjan made several performed works, that are ususaly seen as video documents. The most well known is Taking a Line for a Walk, in which Nauman is seen walkind around a square marked on the floor. Another work, a develplmetn of this piece, is a 4 meter high white box round which the viewet can walk. A CCTV monitor is placed at each corner, on which the viewer sees themselves passing the previsou monitor. The film playing on the CCTV monitor is played back at slight delay, so that the viewer always sees themselves following them, but at the same time, since they are walking round a square, the implication is that they ought to be able to catch up with themselves. 
Nauman made other video works, for example of himself dressed as a clown laughting uncontrollably for 30 minutes. The way the video is presented is always important, in this case for example the monitor is in a wooden cubicle. In the 1980s he began to make more static sculptural work, and began a series in which he cast dogs in rubber and displayed them in various ways, for esxample hanging from the ceiling in a carousel like structure. 
In the 1990s Nauman made a large scale video installation for which he filmed himself headn and shoulders, talking to himself, and presented a number of these films, on 2metre hight flat screen monitors upside down.
!Nelson, Mike.
Bristih artist born in the 1960s who makes installations that are like mazes. Nelson constructs a series of rooms and corridors within a gfallery space, which the viewer enters trhogh a door in the gallery. Inside they are free to wander in the interior space htat nelson has created but there is only one way out. The first of these installations created a series of rooms that seemdto have been recently abandoned. Some were like offices in a factory, others empty rooms, all had a feeling of recent presence but alos of possible sinister events. There are clues in the form of items pinned to the wall, furniture, but ery few objects. The environment seems timless and the viewer has the disorientating experience of not being able to tell what period, country or type of building they are in. the spaces are extremely real. At a central point in the maze it seems that the viewer has reached the point at which they started but this is in fact a replica of that room and the determined participant carries on to discover several more rooms. There are hints of the psychological pressures that are sometimes brought to bear on prisoners.  
Another example is a maze Nelson created specifically for the Tate gallery in London, in which the viewer enters what seems to be a seires of back rooms at the tate, storage for works of art, wrapping and packing areas, etc. It is very difficult to believe that this is an installation that has been constructed in the galleyr and that the viewer has not entered behind the scenes by mistake, but for the peculiar absence of life and activity.
!Nemeth Hajnal.
Hungarian artist born in the 1970s.
!Neshat Shirin.
Iranian artist who has made several large screen projected video installations featuring women wearing the veil and music.
!Neudecker Mariele.
Artists born in the 1960s who makes installations in which she creates model landscapes such as a sea, or a mountain range.
!Newman Barnet.
American painter who made abstract paintings from the late 40s to the 60s. Newmans minimal paintings are known for 'the zip', a line of a contrasting colour running vertically down the canvas. Newman invariably used one or two soldi colours in blocks or bands, often dark blue, black and maroon, but also goldrne ochre colours and aquarmarine, and the zip (red on a dark brown ground for example) animated these, setting up an optical resonance. He spent his whole career painting these and like Rothko was held up as a spiritual painter. One group of paitnigns on a single theme fills a whole room, they are white on white paintings with elements fo black. 
!Newton Helmut.
German phorograhpser who made balck and white or occaisionally coloured photographs of women, naked or clothed, but always objectified as glamourous, made up and fashionable. Newton alwys had his models wearing very high heels. Newtons images fell out of favour for a time in the 1970s when feminist critics claimed back the female form, but he continued to make work. Newtons women often seemed like objects for male pleasure but in fact they have a strange autonomy, despite their nakedness and are not like soft porn. Sometimes several women might be photographed together as in a well known image of several models standing in a group staring at the camera. 
!Nicholson Ben.
British artist who was part of the st Ives group, a group of artist who colonised the small Cornish town in the southwest of England. Nicholason was a contemporary of Barbara Hepworth and he was married to the artist Winifred Nicholson. Nicholsons pioneered a cross between contsrtuctivism and geometric abstraction, and echoes of the forms used by Hepworth can also be seen in his work. His paintings often had raised areas made by cutting out shapes in ply wood. He used white and grey a lot adding lines and smaller areas of brighter colours. He also made representational works, most of which featured the Cornish land and seascapes. 
!Nils Norman.
British artist who makes installations, works on paper, models and written texts. Norman's work presents ecololgical and sustainable models for human existence, in particluar urban exitistence. Norman draws on 1960s and 70s models for resistence, tailoring them to the new century and a new era of globalisioation and anti-capilalism. In particular he focuses on the the modernist myth of creating quatliyt of life for every one through good pracites in design and the built envrinoment. s
His investigations of how to put simple ideas for more socially responsible living into practise take various forms. He has made a number of architectural models that demonstrate for example acts fo urban resistance or reclamation such as the conversion of the flat roof of an apartment building in New York into a vegeitalvl plot to enable the residents to be self sufficient. He has also designed and built a sutstaninalbe bus called Geocruiser (2001). The bus runs on converted waste fat from the catering industrut and has solar panels enabling it to actually return energy to the national grid. It collects rainwater and part of it is a green house with a composter enabling the bus to be used to grow food effictently. The bus aloso houses a library of books and texts on ecologyoily and self-sufficincy and a computer terminal with internet access, a parinter and a photocopier available for public use wherevbver the bus stops. Visitors can photocpay any texts they wish to take away. Geocruiser visited several cities in the UK and in Europe. 
!Nitsch Herman.
Austrian performance artist who pioneered Viennese Actionism which is the name he gave to his live art practise. This consisted of solo works and also evnets or happenings that involved a large number of people. Nitschs performances usually take the form of some kind of slef divised ritual, echoing religious, pagan or tribal sacrificial events and usually involves a degree of self infitced pain or endurance, and often large amounts of animal blood and carcasses. The events are conducted with great solemnity and conviction. 
The large scale events have taken place in various locations, sometimes outdoors. In one a number of volunteers were crucified. Often the participants are covered in blood. Nitsch thinks fo the blood as paitns, as a record fo the event, and produces large numbers fo paitnigns and works on paper as well as photo and video.
Nitsch is perhaps best known for a performance in which he reputedly cut off (or at least mutiliated) his own penis. This is doucmnetaino by a series of photographs which show Nitsch bandaging various parts of his body.
!Noble Paul.
Bristh artist born in the 1960s who makes pencil drawings, video and amimation. Noble's earliest work consisted of bookjackets made for exisiting books which altered or reposititoned the book in some way, usually through humour or puns, echoing the British playwright Joe Orton's illicit alteration of libray books.
The main body of Noble's work to date depicts his creation fo a fictititous town called Nobson New Town. The arichitecture of Nobson is constructed on the blueprints of a typographical font created by Noble whose capital letters are three dimensional blocks, enabling Nobson to draw arrangements of buidlsinbg that spell out words. These blocks have the appearance of modernistic concrete stuructures and the letters are hard to read but decipherable.
The Nobson project is an indictment of the way of life in the west, a swiftian satire describing an urban and rural dystopian with utopian elements. The name Nobson is descriptive of the phallic forms of some of the buildings, and the phallic form is put to use every where from tree stumps to drawbridges. There are no people in the drawings.
Noble's drawings have been made since 1997 and show every aspcest of life in Nobson from the dwellings, the park, the cemetery, the factories, the sewage works, the school, the hospital, in fact every amentity and facilty a small town would have. There is also a large house for the artist which has a number of rooms and a tower. The drawings are made in pencil and are about 3 metres high, extremely detailed and finley drawn so that the whole drawing can take a long while to peruse. Any words spelled out by the buildings are readable from a distance only. Noble also makes small drawings showing details from Nobson.
The words in the drawings usually spell out a political or idealogical statement or quotation that deals in some way with the life of ordinary working people.
Noble has also represented Nobson as a photomural, for which he made a tent in the shape fo a letter from the Nobson typeface and pitched in in a forest. Woodand animals are added to the photpgraph digitally as if this were a rural idyll. He has made a digitally animated drawing too, which shows the factorys of Nobson in a static single shot view, with very little happening save for smoke plumes emitting from chimneys and a train travelling across periodically. 
!Noble Tim and Webster Sue.
Bristih artist partners born in the late 1960s who make sculpturee and installation. Noble and Webster's work is an unashamed unapologietc ode to money, creation, fame and ego combined with traditional forms, crafts and materials. Their illuminated signs which lean against the gallery wall or are moutned on it are an example of this. These may take the tform fo a dollar sign entirely made of white light bulbs, or of tattoo designs such as a heart stabbed by a dagger with a word on on a ribbon, Las Vegas style.
Noble and Welbster made an installation fro which they made life size models of themselves as apes, cast in fibreglass and walking on a pristine white undulating gallery floor. Antohre consists of an enormous pile of rubbish, with a strong light projected at it, casting a shadow on the wall behind to revela the profiles fo the artists, created from careful arrangement of the rubbish but only visible as a shadow. 
!Nogueira Lucia.
South American artist born in the 1950s and died in the 1990s who made installations from glass beads and blown glass placed on the floor and hanging.
!Noland Cady.
American artist who is known for her scatter wroks in the 1980s in which she placed objects on the floor of a gallery and for her scaffolding pole contructions. 
!Nolde Emile.
Belgian artist who made epxressionistci lansacpes and portraits in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century charactireress by very bright colours, impasto. Member of the Blaue Reiter group.

!O'Connell Tina.
Irish artist born in the early 1960s who makes large scale architiectural installations often using concrete, and usually site specific.
!O'Keefe Georgia.
American artist who is well known for her flower paintings. O'Keefe painted hugely enlarged flowers which also alluded to the female anatmony. She used very strong colours and forms. O'Keefe spent many years living in the desert in New Mexicco from which she dervived much of her inspiraritn, also making a series fo works dpeictinig bleached animla bones and skulls wchih she found there. O'keefes achievement was, throught her flower paitnigns, to turn a traditionally delicate and female subject into large bold and even aggressive or threatening forms.
!Ocean Humphrey.
British artist who makes semi-abstract paitnigns.
!Offili Chris.
British artist born in the late 1960s who became known and initially notorious for his pattern paintignis and paitnigns of balck women and men with elephant dung attached in the mid 1990s. Offilis figurative paintings are complex in their execution. A psychedilic pattern is painted first, then a figure added, picked out and filled in exclusivyely with concnentric lines of tiny dots fo paint in many colours which follow the contours of the figure. His earlier works have cutouts from pornographic magazines collaged on to the surface. The whole paitning is then covered with a layer of poured plastic resin, adding a physical depth ot the surface. Elelphant dung soaked in resin is attached tot eh canvase, sometimes with words and names picked out in coloured map pins on them. The paintings rest against the wall on two lumps of dung.
Ofili mostly made paintings of women in this series which he described as goddesses, buesutful highly stylised head and shoulders portraits of woman wearing jewellery, including a black Madonna which created a furore amongst the amercian Christian right for it juxtapostitgon of the virgin mary with elephant dung. He also made a number of full length portraits of male characters including one called Captian Shit, a black superhero. Ofili continned to paint women and to make a large number of watercolours on paper, drawings and prints, until the early 00s. 
He then made a series of paintings depicting a man and a woman, as lovers, but also as iconogrpahci symbols of Africa and its people. Ofili;s continued to use the dung to represent his connection with his mother country (he had begun to use it after his first trip to see where his family had come from). The lovers paintings are made in the same way, but there are fewer collaged elements. Flowers and leaves are added to the backgrounds and the paintings are more reflective.
In 2002 he made a serieis of 13 works featuring a monkey, paitnied in the same way. These are installed in an especially contructed timber lined room resembling a darkended chapel. Illuminated so that they have an icon like quality each paitigns is based on a different colour and titled Mono Azul, Mono Or for example, meaning Blue Monkey Gold Monkey. The twelve monkeys, six on each side of the room, depict the apostles, and the gold monlkey at the end of the room is Christ. This work is typically both irreverent and reverent.
All of Ofili's work is characterised by a sense of the profound combined with a highly decorative surface and a dry humour. He plunders popular culture and mixes influence in the same way that hip hip music does. Hip hop is often cited as an importance influnec on Ofili's work. 
!Olde Wolbers Saskia.
Duthc artist born in around 1970 who makes videos based on models that she constructs in her studio whcih have a spoken narrative oviceover. Olde Wolbers takes a true story, often from a newspaper, a tale of a soemoens life or something that happerned to someone, and elaborates it, writing a first person narrative which Olde Wolbers chooses a person or an actor to read it. She imagines a scene in which this tale might unfold and constructs a trhee dimensional model, which she then films. The models are made from a variety of materils - one model of an underground car park also resembles the frosted interitor of a friedge but in fact is made from textured plastic sheeting and plastic bottles and cups. Antohter of a hospital ward is made from a pet cage dipped in hopusehold gloss paint and submerged in a tank, filmed underwater. The paint dirps but stays in place, creating an eerie white scene.
Olde Wolbers films have an eerie often futuristic quality which is at odds both with the prosaic materials fo their construction and wtih the true story narrative of the voiceover. The narrative becomes extraordinary both in the writing and in the reading, Watching, the viewer has to grapple with interpreting what they see, which seems very real yet palpably is not and relating it to what they hear. 
!Oldenburgh Claes.
American artist born in the 1940s who is known for his soft scultures. Which he began to make in the sixties. Along with Warhol, Oldenburhg was the main pop art sculptor. Oldenburgh worked in a number of different media dand also made a large number of working drawings. His soft sculptures are made of fabric, sewn and stuffed in the manner of soft toys, using canvas which he then painted or vinyl. The sculptures represent vastly enlarged objects such as a light switch made in white vinyl, a drum kit made in paitned canvas and a hamburger, accurately scaled up and constructed but stuffed loosely so that they sagged and collapsed. The light switch (about 1 metre square) hangs drooping on the wall, the drum kit (3 metres across) flopps in a heap on the floor. Oldenburgh also made many painted clay sculptures, roughly modelled and paitned, some cast in bronze, of which one of a hamburger is the best known. 
In the 1970s Oldenburhg began ot make public sculpure and also made a large number of designs, plans and sketches for mounumental works which were not always realised. These include a 30 metre high lipstick momument, a building based on the head of mickey mouse and one based on an electrical plug.
!Olowskowa Pauline.
Polish artist who makes drawings and collages, sometimes working collaborativelyt with Lucy Mackenzie.
!Op de Bek Hans.
Belgian artist who makes photographs.
!Opie, Julian.
Bristihh artist born around 1960 who makes works in a range of media. Opie's early work consisted of painted cut outs made in folded and bent sheet metal. They stand on the floor and represent objects such as a pile books, telephones, even a paitning. The objects are paitned in a cartoon style with black outlines and they Opies to solution to his idea of making painting into sculpture This work demonstrated an interest in generic representation which has sustained throughout his career.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s Opie made a large number of suctpures fabricated from industrial materials. These fall into two groups - case, chest or freezer like constructions and glass screen constructions. The case or chest works are made from sheet metal with aluminium fittings - edging, feet, ventilation grilles etc. They are ambiguous since they are evidently non functional, with no discernible means of opening them, yet they refer visually only to functionality. In them Opie refers both to modernist design and to minimla sculpture in particular referrint to the work of Donald Judd. 
The glass screen works are arrangemnts of toughened glass in aluminium frames to resemble doors and glass walls that might be seen at an airport or other public space. The glass often has discs etched on it in a row at eye level. These arrangements engage the viewer in a familiar experience of negotiaon of glass barriers, whilst considering the formal arrangement as a sculpture.
Opie made a number of works taken from the symbols and pictograms used in signage, developing an idea of the point at which the individual becomes generic and vice versa. 
Opie has made many paitngins and prints, usually screen prints. The road paintings, Imagine You Are Driving, (around 60cm high) were made after he drove across America, and show roads reduced to the minimum of detail - a balck road, with white lines and green verges with blue sky, each rendered in absoulutey flat acrylic paint with hard edges. These piatnings conflate the experience of driving with the experience of the computer game and make the case for the roadscape being the contermporary landscape paiting. A series of night paintings are made in balck with blurry circles of yellow, white and red light indicating road lamps and car headlights and rear lights. 
Opies Computer game paintings (similar sized and also 2m high versions made) are a development of the road paintings, representing the same experience of driving but this time through a version of a computer generated urban environment smoothed out so that there is no detail at all. 
Opie took this approach into three dimensions with his model village sculptures, immaculatey made and spray painted buildings with almost no detailingt so that they become generid 
In the late 1990s continuing to work the idea of the generic Opie made a series of digital drawings of people he knew, removikng all the detail from a head and shoulders photograph to produce a generic image in balck on a brightly coloured background that actually retained a great deal o findividuality. These images were used on an album cover and became known to a much wider public. He also began to make digital animations, taking the same principle and applying it to the moving image. He filmed a person moving and reduced this image to the bare minimum, resulting in a moving pictogram which still retained some of the characteristics of the individual on which it was based.
!Oppenheim Dennis.
American artist working from the late 1960s onwards, much of Openheims work was site specific land art with a performative endurance element. For example in one of Openheim's best known works, Trench, he suspends his outstretched body by pressing with his hands and feet agiasnt the top of two opposite walls of a purpose built trench. In another he lies in the sun until he is burned and changes colour, calling this the act of makng the artwork.  
!Oppenheim Meret.
Surrealist artist working in France at the beginning of the twentieth century who made an iconic sculpture of a fur covered cup, saucer and spoon, as well as one of a pair fo white high heeled shoes upsidedown on a silver salver trussed with string and with paper frills on the ends of the heels. Oppenheim's objects provide a contrast to the work of many of her male contemporaries. She also made a pair of leather gloves, the conventional stiched ridges on the backs of each made to resemble the veins on the back of a hand.
!Orozco Gabriel.
Brazilian sculptor who made a work called Ping Pond Table, consisting of two ping pong tables cut in half where the net would be and arranged in a cross shape with a fishpond in the vacant square area in the middle. Four players can play simultaneously, the pond replacing the net as the barrier to be crossed by the ball.
!Osorio Pepon.
South American artist born in the 1960s died in the 1990s. Osorio made a work in which he cycled around a platform built at the top of a very large tree encircling the trunk.
!Otto Knapp Silke.
German artist working in Britain born in the late 1960s who makes paintings using watercolour on canvas. Otto Knap's earliest work in the 1990s was a series of female portraits taken from fashion magazines followed by a seiries of American landscapes sometimes in panoramic format often taken from Marlbofro advertisements and form her own photogrhaps. These became more impressionistic until she began to paint in watercolour on a white ground, making a number of groups of landscapes between 40 and 80 cm high. The watery paitn is applied gestrually pooling on the surface creating an often illusiory image. 
A Los Angeles series shows the city by day and by night, as does a group of Las Vegas paintings. Otto Knap then made a number of 'vegetation' paintings depicting the greenness of parks, gardens and galsshouses such as Kew with enough detail hinted at for the viewer to interpret the image as a landscape, as well as some yellow desert paintings. More redcently Otto Knap has made a number of paintings of show girls, again in watercolour, the colours predominantly red.
!Oulton Therese.
Brisith artist who became known in the 1980s for her thickly encrustedly dark coloured semiabstract paintings.
!Oursler Tony.
US artist who became known for his video installations in the early 1990s. Oursler filmed himself and other people talking. He made scarecrow like figures with white pillows for heads, some life size some doll sized. The videos are projected on to the pillows, the projector either wall mounted or placed on the floor directly in front of the figure. The projectors are very much part of the work. The figures then 'speak' to the viewer, usually stream of consciousness babble, often sounding as if they are talking to some kind of therapist or analyist. Sometimes they become distressed and scream. Although patently unreal, the figures seem very real and the viewer has a poignant attatchment to them. In one case the projection is onto a heap of clothes as if the person who inhabited them has gone and there is just a soul remaining. In another a pillow on a sofa might carry the projection, or one squashed under a toppled chest of drawers, or stuffed into a suitcase. The general impression is of often torutrued souls whispering and babbling in uncomfortable positions.
!Paik Nam June.
American artist who was one fo the first to make and show video as a sculpture. Paik was perhaps the first artist to broadcoast his work on national tv, which he did by purchasing advertising slots. The work most often associatied with him is a robot out of tv monitors. Paik foresaw the ubiqutiey of television culture from its earliest days. 
!Paladino Mimmo.
!Palermo Binky.
!Palmer Samuel.
English painter.
!Pane Gina.
British performance artist who made endurance works, most infamously one in which she bit her fingers in an attempt to loosen her fingernails, periodically rinsing them in a bowl of milk. She also made a work for hwihc she inserted rose thorns into her skin. Pane was one of a number of artists working in Britain in the 1980s who resisted the idea of art as a commoditiy and used their own bodies as medium and subject.
!Paolozzi Eduardo
Tottenham Court Road underground station.
!Pardo Jorge.
Arist whose designs interiors, funrnituer and lighting for specific sites. Buitli his own house in California which he has declared an art work.
!Parker Cornelia.
cold dark matter an exploded view, thirty pieces of silver, gun, LP shavings, steam roller trail, 
!Parreno Philippe.
manga character Annlee/liam Gillick
!Parris Jeanette.
Britsih artist born in the 1960s who makes drawings, digital animations, writes produces and directs musicals and sings in a band. Her performing acitivities are part of her pracitis as an artist.
!Pasmore, Victor.
Britsih artist who made abstract paitnigns and works on paper in betwetn the 40s and 60s. 
!Patterson Richard.
British painter born 1965, painted hyper realist figurative works, notably a very large landscape format landscape with a massively enlarged plastic toy minotaur figure, the whole painting given a slight blur by the softening of the paint but parts in sharp focus. The effect is one of double take. 
!Patterson Toby.
Scottish artist who skateboards
!Perfect Dan.
British artist who makes small decoratibe paintings and works on paper, landscape like patterns that are reminiscent of the 1950s.
!Perriton Simon.
British artist born 1962 makes paper cut-outs on a large scale. These often but not always doily folded designs, and although at first glance they appear as lacy patterns, they are in fact thematic, for example a mushroom cloud in circular symmetry with CND symbol, barbed wire, mixed in with floral patterning to create complex intricate and skilled interwoven patters of great delicacy and ephemerality. The cut-outs may be single or multicoloured and are made by sticking paper together to the required size and then cutting out the design with a scalpel.
Perriton sometimes layers versions or the same cutout one colour on top fo antoher. The cutouts are always displayed unframed and unmournted,l hanging from pins in the wall.
!Perry Grayson.
British artist who made ceramic pots and vases richly decorated with drawn images, collaged photographic and printed elements, huge variety of glazes and gold and silver leaf. the pots seem like precious decorative objects but on closer inspection are revealed to bear highly politicised messages about issues that concern the artist fro example abuse, events that have caught his notice. This juxtaposition of luxury objet d'art with hard hitting message makes the vases transcend their genre. Perry is a transvestite who nearly always appears in public as a woman. She has many identities, a Russian babushka, a Victorian lady, and often carries a porcelain doll dressed in a matching costume. Perry has also made photographic works - as a woman in her various alter egos, and embroideries. The costumes themselves are made by Perry and are also part of the work.
!Pettibon Raymond.
American artist who makes pen and ink drawings. Pettibons main inspirations are William Blake, surfing, film and cartoons. His drawings often use the cartoon format fo a balck outlined box, with text at the botton hand written in capitals, as well as thought bubbles. There is rarely a drawing without text. The transient medium and sometime jokey style he uses and the subject he chooses to explore belie the seriousness of Pettibon's intent. He often alludes to the larger issues of life, death and the sublime. Surfing is Pettibons passion and the surfer in his work symobolese the imsignifacanc of human kind in the face of nature. The surfer might for example be shown at to top fo a huge wave, and have a thought bubble with an eixstnetial thought wirttten in it. Another drawing might feature a gun, or a light bulb with a caption. Some of the captions read like lines from a 40s film noir.
Pettibons drawings are either around 25 or 60 cm high, made on white paper, usually exhibited pinned to the wall unframed.
!Peyton Elizabeth.
Artist born in the 1960s who paitns portraits of her friends and of famous people. These are often pop stars, and have included the Biriths royal family. Peyton's work in the 1990s often captured the zietgiest, yet her work also refers to the history of portraiture. The paitings are all done from photographs. Peyton always paints on board, quite small (around 50 cm high maximum) in portrait format, using translucent colour rapdildy and simply applied. The white paitng used for the ground and the coloured paint often drips over the edge of the board.
!Pflum Daniel.
german artist who makes suclputres that appear to be corporate logos and signs.
!Phaophanit Vong.
Vietamese artist who made an installation for which he covered the floof of a gallery with Rice which concealed a red fluorescent tube runnig the length of the gallery which sent red glow through the rice. A tribute to the killing fields.
!Picabia Frances.
French artist who made a large body of work, Picabia is best known for the paitngns that depict human machine like figures and his use of text. He also worked as a graphcih designer and made his own typefaces.
!Picasso Pablo.
Picasso is a Spanish artist usually named as the greatest modern artist in the world. Picasso was born in the late nineteenth century and made his greatest works in the 1930s and 40s. He died in the 1970s.
Picasso's work progressed through a number of different periods and he made work in a variety of media. His skill at drawing is consistently evident, but he was equally good at sculuptre.
Of Picassos early career, his Blue period is the best known. This describes a number of figurative paintings that have a blue light cast on them, for example a boy with a dove in his hand, and a young boy dressed as a Harlequin balancing on a ball. The dove and the clown, paritcuarly Harlequin and Peirrot were recurring motifs throughout Picassos life.
In the early 1900s Picasso, along with Brauq and Gris, would have seen African sculutres for the first time when a collection was exhibited in paris. This, combined with Cezannes experiments with the picture plane, led the three artists to make the first cubist works. 
Althogh Cubism is most readily attributed to Picasso, it was Gris who in fact made the first Cubist collage. Picasso made a number of these collages featuring bottles, guitars, and also some small scultures including one of a shelf with some domestic objects on it made from rough bits of wood, painted with a bobble braid tacked along the front. 
Picasso made a great number of Cubst paintings, including some figure studies in which he tries to represent every facet of a three dimensional figure in two dimensions. These paintings are realery more that a metre high and predominalnty brownish or greyish. 
During this period Picasso began to develop his mature style to reach its greatest achievement in two paintings, Guernica and the Demoiselles D'Avignon. Guernica was painted in 1917 to commemorate General Francos massacre of a Spanish village. In it Picasso wanted to show the horror of war and suffering, and he was conscious of making a painting which would get attention. He made the painting immediately after the event and it was intended to be given to the town, although it never was. Geurnica is a very large paitnign, 3 meters by 6, which shows a number of figures based clearly on African sculpture (for example Dogon masks) paitnied in black, purple, white and grey. It is an image of horror, of death and suffering, the figures have mask like faces, and their limbs are intertwined so that the whole painting operates as an abstracgt composition as well.
It was the first time a modern artist had made such an explicit painting that was so deliberately intended to shock. Reproducitons fo Gurenican were instantly printed in newspapers all over the world.
Demoiselles D'Avignon is composesd along similar lines but depicts a more pleasant scene of naked women in the countryside, painted in flesh tones and greens. However the women have the same mask like faces as the figures in Guernica. A film was made of Picasso making this paitning, showing how he drew out the figures with continous lines, never correcting himself.
Picasso painting many portraits, often of the various women in his life, including Dora Maar, one of his lovers. 
As well as carved and assembled sculpture, Picasso made a number of surrealist objects, such as a bull's head made from a bycyce seat and a pair fo handlebars for horns.
Drawing underpinned everything that Picasso did, and he made a large number fo them. In particualy a number of balck line drawings of the Minotaur, a myth which fascninated him. Later in he made clouloured lithographs which look like pastel drawings which are very well known, such as a simple hand holding a bunch of flowers and a dove with an olive branch in its beak. 
In his exploration of every medium Picasso included ceramics, producing a great many plates, vases, and other objects, which he painted on, and also, surpisingly Silverware - he made a series of tooled and embossed silver platters. 
!Pickstone Sarah.
British painter born in the early 1960s.
Pierson Jack
American artist who makes photographs, paintings, sculptures and installation. Pierson's work is diverse - his photographs are of everyday scenes given a fairy tale twist. His paintings are really photographs printed on to the canvase using a three colour printing process that transfers pigment in discrete dots of colour. His installations are various, examples are a section of wall and floor painted yellow with a cabinet with a record player on it, some LPS whdi the viewr is invited to play and a chair, and a section of the wall and floor paitned purple with a made up single bed placed on the floor well away from the wall on which the viewer is invited to lie.
Peirson's sculpture in the main consists of phrases, sayings, and truisms spelled out with found signage lettering on the wall. The lettering is all in different styles materials and sizes, some old, some new, some Perspex, some moulded plastic, some painted or gilded wood, some cast or cut metal.
!Piggot Hadrian.
Britihs artist best known for a body of work he made in the 1990s. Piggot crafted porcelain sculptures that took the form of bathroom sinks, for example, their forms changed to smooth rounded abstract shapes, convex where they should be concave, entirely without function yet with the addition of chrome taps and other fittings they became surreal objects. A plughole might be placed on a bulging shape where no water could ever collect. Piggot had leather cases made with satin lined moulded inserts to hold the sculptures, adding to their surrealism but inferring an useful portability. He also made some cargvings from bars of soap.
Piggot late began to make photographs of lanscape.
!Piper Adrian.
Bristih artist who makes work about ethnicity.
!Piper Keith.
Brisisth artist.
!Pissarro Camille.
French nineteenth century artist contemporary of Courbet who painted landscapes. 
!Pistoletto, Michelanglo.
Italian sculptor working from the 1980s onwards who makes installations usually featuting mirrors made of steel. The mirrors are deployed as a literal way of making the viewer part of his work.Sometimes the mirrors have something printed on them. He alsl made an installation concistitng of a mountainous pile of second hand cltohes which viewers were invited to help themselves to. 
!Pittman Lari.
American painter who became extremely popular in the 1990s for his intensly intricate and complex abstract patingins. Pittman draws on a multiplicity of sources, borrowing with impunity and putting together intense compositions that owe somethynig variously to fabric design, the 1950s, architectural drawing, pop art, cartoons, and post modern painting. It is impossigle to locate the source of the elements of a Pittman painting because there are just so many elements and they are so perfrctly graphically intertwined.
But what makes Pittman's work particaraly distinctive is the method he uses to make them. The main design is outlined and painted in flat colour. This in itself produces a complex very brightly coloured paiingtin. Then dots of paint, squeezed onto the canvas (the dots no more than 2mm across) are usedl to outline some areas, fill in others. The dots are three dimensional and it becomes hard to believe that the patoingin could have been made by hand, although it clearly has. Pittmans paitnigns function as a bold design with an overall structure as well as a surface of patterns within pattersn that seems to have more in common with embroidery than painitng.
!Plackman Carl.
Bristih sculptor who made assemblages with natural materials and steel, particularly favouring pebbles. 
!Polke Sigmar.
A German artist who began working in the 1960s. Polke is famous for painting on tea towels (also on bedsheets, table cltohrs and curtains) In fact he tends to eschew canvas as as gournd altogether, sometimes working on resin panels as well as a huge variety of woven and printed textiles. Much of his work has photogrphaci screen printing as well as hand painting. The screen print is usually a fragment of a vastly enlarged image from a newspaper, the dots that make up the image as big as a coin, printed in balck. Polke's hand painted is usually black outlines of figures and objetcts. 
Polke's paintings depict such subjects as war, classical myth, weaponry, rural idyll and are notoriousl resistant to intoerpretaiopn. Many of the images are taken from newspapers as if to address the proliferation of imagery and the difficulty fo assimlilatign it. The fabric and pattern of the background is carefully chosen. Sometimes two or more contrasting panels are stitched together. Polke is a painter who is concerned with surface and image, what is real and not real, how an image is read, in what order and how narrative reading can be imposed and obstrcued. 
In the late 90s and early 00s, Polke pursued his interest in enlarging printed images by making use of digital images and large format printing to produce 20m wide enlarged newspeper images, printed on vinyl coated fabric.
!Pollock Jackson.
The best known of the American abstract expressionist painters and argulaby the best known modernist painter of all time. Pollock was born in the 1920s and died in the early 70s in a car accident. 
Pollock began working in the 1950s and at the end of the decade he began to experiment with pouring paint. Placing the canvas on the floor he began to use the brush to pour housepaint from, not touching the canvas at all. This was a radical step, since no one had ever made a paitnign without touching the canvas and with so little control over the result. Pollock became very skilled in this way of applying paitn, using bigger and bigger canvases and more colours.
These works made him a sensation. Nobody had ever seen anything like them. A photographer Hans Namuth made a seminal film of Pollock showing him pouring paitn on the canvas which included a section filmed from below through glass. It became known as action paitning. The paintings are up to 2 metres high and very wide. They are all composed of an all over 'pattern' of drips, applied in a dymanic but highly controlled way, so that an overall design is evident. Far from relinquisiheg control, Polloack became master of the technique. The combinations of colours are subtle, usually involving balck and white with one or two other colours. One of the best known is Blue Poles, whicih has two vertical blue stripes amidst the swrilign drips.
Pollock made many public commissions and his work was takien up by the American government as beign a pinnacle of modernims and representiong American freedom. Unwittingly Pollocks work was used as US propaganda against the soviet Union, when the CIA covertly funded an international touring exhibition fo the work of the abstract expressionists designed to be compared directly and unfavoruabley iwht soviet socialist realist art. The abstract expressionists represented freedom of expression at a time when the government wanted to promote American as the land of freedom and thus perpetuate anti-communist sentiment.
Pollock was married to Lee Krasner, also an abstract painter. Krasner saw Pollock through many years of increasing alcholosim and infodieltiy, taking him to live and work in a house on Long Island to help him stop dringking, until she felt forced to leave him. However she continued to care for him. Krasner subjugated her own careet to Pollocks and it seems reasonable to suppose that he was unlikely to have become successful or even made the action paintings without her support.
!Pondick Rona.
Birtish artist who makes sculpture by reupholstering and altering furniture. A chair might have legs like an animal for example. A sofa might have its shape altered to allulde to the female form. Pondick's work is influenced by surrealism in the way she transforms an everyday object.
!Poons Larry.
Amercian artist working from the 1980s onwards, Poons' meticulous cartoon-like paintings usually depict landscapte with text on panels within the compostition. For example a gravestone or the pages of an open book might carry the text, which is painted as if it were a printed typeface. Poons paints in a precise way using flat shiny colours and hard edges. 
!Poussin Nicholas.
French artist who painted classical themes, Poussin made precisely drawn and richly coloured paintings that appear quite static and almost theatrical. He was rediscovered in the early twentieth century by the art historian Antony Blunt who wrote a catalogue raisonne. 
!Prendergast Kathy.
Britsih artist who has made a series of abstracted map or plan drawings of cities. These are extremely detailed pencil drawings about 60 cm high, showing the basic street plan and zones of a city, but without using any conventional cartogrtaphcis. They have the appeaance of cobwebs, or organic forms.
!Prieto Monique.
American artist who paints large flat-coloured abstracts which look at first as if they are accidental 'pours' of colour but which in fact are drawn on a computer first. Prieto says that she evolved this method of working after the birth of her children to speed up the production process, enable her to do some preparatory work at home and make the most of her time. The paintings are cool, calm and reflective.
!Prince Richard.
American artist who took the legacy of pop art, and developed it, working from the 1970s onwards. Prince makes a variety of types of work, but is most usually associated with two: the Marlvboro add and the joke paitngns. These illustrate Prince's prime interest in generic forms. 
The Marlboro work is a reproduced advertisement for Marlboro cigarettes with the cowboy on the horse removed. What remains is still instantly recognisable because of the brand name, and the type of landscape. It is a while before the viewer realises that the cowboy is not there, since the image is so familiar and this si what they expect to see. This reveals clearly how embedded in visual memoty the advertismetn is.
Prince has made the joke paintings throughout his career. They are very simply a joke painted on a plain coloured canvas in a san serif typeface. The colours, typefaces and size of paitnign varies, he has made some that are 4 metres high. The letters are usually black or white, but Prince has also made paintings in which the lettering is very indistinct. The jokes are mostly quite funny.
Prince has also made a large number of paintings using photographic screen printing mixed with painting, and abstrct pattern paintings. His prolific output is distinguished by its variety, but also by consistency within that variety.
!Prior Lisa.
Ameircan artist who makes video works featuring her alter ego who is an expert in any chosen field. Prior's films borrow the styel of corportate or promotional video, and she appears as a psychiatrist fro example, telling the viewer about a certain psychiatric condition. Or about the mental health of Vietnam veterans. Or about her own dating experiences. Prior's persona is compelling but ultimately fallible and not without humour. More recently Prior has made a work which has more formal concerns. She filmed a dog shaking itself, then looped this short section and slowed it down. The sound of the bell on the dogs collar is transformed and the dogs shaking appears graceful and deliberate.
!Pyman James.
British artist born in the 1960s who makes peincil drawings on paper. Pyman's drawings are often large, up to one and a ahlf meters high, and depict a variety of subjects rangin from groups of people to landscapes or even just a view of waves on water. They are drawn in a soft but precise way, the pencil smudged to create soft shaded areas. 
!Quinn Mark.
British artist born in the 1960s who makes sculpture. Quinn's best known work is Blood Head, a cast of his own head made from several pints of his frozen blood. This is displayed in a refrigerated vitrine on a plinth. Quinn's work is mostly concened with the human body, life and death. A companion work to Blood Head is Bread Head, a bust modelled from bread dough and baked. Quinn pursued his interest in preservation through freezing in other works. He used a species of frog which hibernates at sub zero temperatures in suspended animation, displaying the frog in a block of ice in a refregieartaed vitrine. He also made a larger work using a mass of frozen flowers. Quinn also cast his own body and used it to produce a thin latex skin, which he hung form a hook in the ceiling, as if it were his own flayed skin. More redcently Quinn has been pursuing his work with flowers and making photographs.  




199


