!In the twenty first century it is thought to be difficult to define art. It does not always exist in a gallery. It is not always a solid object or a flat image. It can be imagined, an action, a pledge, existing only temporarily, it can be made by one people or many, it can be an idea which accumulates over time. It can exist in other realities and will exist in realities of which we do not yet know. It is thought not to be the servant of the state, of religion or of ritual, but to exist purely for its own sake. This subjective freedom is highly valued and often disputed. The one constant is that art is made by artists and that it is made for its own sake. It was not always this way.
!!THE BEGINNING OF ART.
The story of art is the story of the human urge to represent the world. This began before humans had acquired verbal language with the simple drawing of a line in the sand with a finger. In 6000 BC the indigenous groups of prehistoric humans in the continents of Europe, Africa and Asia, the Middle East, the Far East, Australasian and the Americas had not developed any forms of verbal or visual communication. There was no form of representation in the world. But as these peoples evolved and began to acquire language, conceptual and cognitive skills, they began to create tools. The first tool may have been a stick used to draw in the sand, or it may have been a stone used to crack a nut or to kill an animal. 
!!PREHISTORIC ART.
Tools and visual representations are the first evidence we have of the existence of early civilisations. The earliest examples of these have been found in Africa, the home of the Neanderthals from whom all humans are descended. Prehistoric people were developing forms of representation before the discovery of fire. We know this because some of their drawings and tools have survived. Art, or the evidence of people's urge to record their life, is the oldest surviving evidence of human endeavour. 
It may be the case that music, probably in the form of rhythm, is an older form of human expression but only drawing, artefacts and objects have permanence. This is why they are assigned such great value in western culture where linear history is the primary means of self-definition.
Many other cultures do not place the same emphasis on history. Their artefacts and art are different.
In the beginning art may have been pure representation. We do not know whether there was a purpose to art other than pure self expression because there are many examples of prehistoric art whose purpose is unknown to us. There are lines drawn in the desert in south America that form geometric patterns visible only from the air, patterns scratched and carved into rock, and the countless temporary forms of expression that must have been washed or blown away.
!!THE STONE AGE. 
As humans evolved, their visual representations became part of the rituals they created around the most important aspects of life, fertility, birth, death and the hunting of food.
Art began to have a specific function. The earliest surviving images are scratched into stone, and consist mostly of lines, for example the cave paintings at Lascaux in France. These and others like them depict people hunting animals, in the case of Lascaux a buffalo like creature. The paintings are drawn in outline on the wall using paints made of earth and soot based pigments, in ochre, reddish brown and black. There are groups of lines too which are unexplained but seem to function as a way of counting or as a visual dynamic. 
As prehistoric people developed more sophisticated tools, they discovered a greater variety of ways of making marks. Flints could be chipped to make sharp blades with which to cut animal skin, animal hair, and to pulverise plants, earth and clay. The discovery of fire meant that substances for drawing, painting and modelling could be dried, heated, reduced, distilled and fire provided soot, ash charcoal and light. 
!!THE IRON AGE.
Iron age people had a much greater range of tools and implements. They had begun to fashion utensils and to make personal adornments from metal, as well as tools and weapons and with these came the development of decoration. Objects began to have greater value and the degree and type of their decoration began to be significant. At the same time Iron age people also began to acquire language.
!The Beaker People.
The Beaker people are one of the first groups to produce metal vessels for eating and drinking. Often these objects were decorated with images of animals, vitally important as a source of food.
!Aboriginal art.
In Australasia, the aboriginal people developed an entirely different form of representation. Early aboriginal art was a language of symbolic representation in which pattern and symbol is used to represent the world. Drawings were made using different colour of sand and earth straight onto the ground. These described the land and its spirits, and depicted time as a journey. The drawings were temporary and not always shown to everybody, sometimes even being made in isolation.
Different cultures developed different views of the world according to their geographical location, the climate and the food that was available to them. During the Iron age people from other continents developed along different paths leading to a material expression of cultural  difference.
!!THE BRONZE AGE.
The smelting of metals led to the discovery of a range of alloys, the first being bronze. These metals could be fashioned more intricately and finely allowing for greater precision and decorative effect such as repeating patterns, beaten metal and thin wire.
!!EARLY CIVILISATIONS. 
The earliest civilisations were formed as people began to travel further in search of food and hospitable land and to encounter other groups both aggressively and peaceably. Humans had previously been nomadic but some groups began to make permanent settlements and with these came buildings and monuments. Cave painting and rock carving had been the only permanent sites for art until the construction of permanent dwellings. Settlement gave rise to the construction of stone buildings, burial chambers and monuments all of which could be decorated or contain representation. For nomadic people portability had been a factor but now larger and heavier objects were produced and people began to make figurative sculptural representations from stone, clay and wood. 
Stonehenge, the great stone circle in Britain which was built in the Stone Age to celebrate the solstice, is a construction which is not decorated but is not a dwelling. It is an early church. Subsequently buildings which were the focus for ritual whether pagan or religious became the most highly decorated anywhere. Art and architecture began to be closely linked.
After the Bronze Age the great early civilisations of the world developed in isolation, reaching their peaks in terms of population, claims to territory and cultural attainment at different periods in history. 
!Pre-Columbian art.
The pre-Columbian people in south America made some of the most sophisticated early sculpture. Their stone male and female figures have distinctive flattened and squared forms, with large featured faces. 
Later in south America the Mayan Aztec and Inca civilisations became very skilful in the use of gold. 

In Africa, the Sumerians and Abyssinians and many other cultures developed widely different forms of visual expression, both in the adornment of the body and dwellings, and in the production of artefacts. 
!!TRIBAL ART.
In all the cntinents of the world large numbers of people continued to live as tribes, some settled and some nomadic, rarely coming into contact with other peoples and each with its own cultural specificity. Native Americans, semi-nomadic peoples who lived off the plains of America, used leather, beads, feathers and wood, and are today customarily symbolised by the Totem pole, a ritual sculpture. Melanesian and Polynesian peoples that depended on the sea for their livelihood used wood, shells and bark and pounded tree bark to make the tapa cloth which they printed with symbolic designs. Their boats were adorned with the work of their most skilled artists. The Inuit who inhabited the frozen North of America carved from soft stone. The African subcontinent yielded the largest number of distinct tribes, for example the Nuba, Yoruba, Dogon, Masai and Zulu. Africa was one of the culturally richest parts of the world. 
!!EMPIRES.
The earliest civilisations soon built cities and with cities came armies and battles for territory. Soon empires were formed the earliest being the Byzantine, Ottoman, the Roman empire the Japanese and Chinese empires which were ruled by successive dynasties. 
Greece is often referred to as the cradle of civilisation and early Greek culture was the most sophisticated in the world.
The development of religions was very significant in terms of the history of art was since these became the focus of a large proportion of artistic activity.
!!ART and RELIGION.
Religions divided the world and generated an unprecedented quantity of visual art. Many parts of the world remained pagan, worshipping local gods with their own iconography and ritual. The Greeks, for example, had a complex family of pagan gods and myths. Larger religions began to spread: in the east, Islam, the religion of the Ottoman empire predominated, and in the middle east Christianity. In Asia Hinduism and Islam co-existed although not necessarily in harmony and in China and Japan Buddhism and Taoism were predominant. Many Northern Europeans such as the Celts, Norse and the Vikings, were pagans. A burial ship found at Sutton Hoo in Britain contained many examples of Viking art. The ancient Egyptians had their own gods. 
 
Art had been an important part of ritual. It now became a servant of the state and of religion and in the process the works that have become known as some of the greatest works of art were created. Artists became the producers of religious iconography but of course in Islamic part areas no figurative representation appeared anywhere since Islam does not permit it
!!WRITING.
Writing is a very important influence on art during the period leading up to the birth of Christ and afterward. It is thought that writing was developed by the Sumerians and that Sanskrit may be the oldest written language. The earliest surviving artefacts are the Dead Sea scrolls, written in Sanscrit on papyrus, and the Rosetta stone, an inscribed tablet. 
Writing was a new way of describing and recording the world which had previously been exclusively visual and for centuries writing was a skill learned only by the very few. Visual imagery remained the primary means of communicating and recording events, but as writing began to tip the balance, art was led to fulfill new functions.
!!EGYPTIAN ART.
The ancient Egyptians developed an early writing system called hieroglyphics They were a wealthy trading civilisation with a highly sophisticated system of government and constructed some of the greatest buildings and monuments ever made, the Pyramids, the Sphinx and the statues of the pharaohs in the Valley of the Kings. The Egyptians worshipped deities such as Isis and Osiris and held cats, certain birds and scarab beetles to be sacred. 
Egyptian art is seen at is most spectacular in the tombs of the pharaohs. They believed in the afterlife, therefore the art that has been found in Egyptian tombs is a good indicator of the life of the living. Egyptian artists were skilled in carving, casting and gold and silver smithing. They had a style of drawing that is very distinctive - all figures are shown with their body facing forward and the head in profile. Hieroglyphs use this style too in the creation of long vertically written texts consisting of pictograms. Egyptian two dimensional art emphasises flatness and uses no perspective but in contrast Egyptian sculpture is very realistic. A cat  has been found, carved from black stone wearing a jewelled collar, for example and countless sarcophagi for mummified pharaohs bear lifelike effigies. The sphinxes and the pharaohs carved on a monumental scale, forty metres high, are in proportion and physiologically accurate.
!!ETRUSCAN ART.
Etruscan pottery is known for the quality of its form and decoration.
!!BYZANTINE ART.
The Byzantine empire was one of the largest empires in the world. Byzantine art is valued for the quality of figurative drawing and painting. which had developed physiological accuracy, realism and early use of perspective. 
!!GRAECO ROMAN ART.
around 400BC the Greeks had developed a civilisation that was pre-eminent. The Greek system of government was the model for all modern nations. The Greeks had a written language, and a flourishing culture. Greek sculpture was the most realistic in the world, and it was at this time that the idea that art should aspire to realism began to take root. 
Greek sculptures were generally of white marble or other stone, and often painted in bright colours. The best known Greek sculptures are the Elgin marbles, subject of a protracted battle between Britain, who has possession of them and Greece, who wants them back. The marbles once adorned the frieze of one of the most famous buildings of antiquity, the Parthenon in Athens. 
The venues de Milo is A classical Greek sculpture which is perhaps the best known sculpture of the western world. The Venus de Milo is made in white marble, and at some point since antiquity has suffered the loss of its arms. The sculpture is considered to represent perfection of female form and it has become a byword for artistic skill and for beauty.
Greek vases are very finely decorated by incising into the black glaze which covers the red clay from which they are made. They are renowned for the quality and realism fo the drawing.
Greek art was for centuries to be seen as the benchmark for all art, and Classical Greece provided the model for the Roman empire, whose cultural achievements dominated Europe for centuries after the Empire fell. The Romans built cities, roads, and infrastructure on a vast scale and created art to decorate their empire and venerate their leaders. The carved stone Roman portrait bust is a good example, of which there are countless examples surviving. Many archaeological sites have revealed the variety fo roman art, for example Herculaneum, Pompeii, two towns which were destroyed but preserved fro centuries by eh eruption of the volcano Vesuvius. Mosaic wall decorations and paintings revealed after excavation in the nineteenth century show mosaic floor designs featuring food and fish, and murals depicting sports such as leaping over a bulls horns and dolphins.
Knossos in Crete also has excellent murals, whilst Volubilis and Lullingstone Villa in Britain contain similar but smaller scale work.
Roman art spread so widely that it became a dominant style, Romanesque, as artists, artisans and craftspeople adapted and personalized it. Many cathedrals and churches in Europe were built in this style for the next 200 hundred years as Catholicism developed.
!!ISLAMIC ART.
At the same time in the middle east and in Asia, Islam spread, bringing its own cultural identity to the towns and cities of the Ottoman empire. Islam demanded that there be no figurative representation of any kind, whether in architectural decoration, textiles, book, fabric, painting or sculpture. This was because the word by which the teachings of Mohammed had been handed down, was itself sacred, and so the word became the only permissible imagery. Written text was rendered as decorative design, carving and patter, and calligraphic patterns of remarkable complexity were carved into stone to adorn mosques for example. Carpets for which the area then known as Persia became so famous, depicted animals, plants and buildings symbolically. For centuries there was no art produced in Islamic parts of the world that represented a human face.
!!CHINESE ART. 
By contrast in the far east, home of Buddhism, representational painting and sculpture featured amongst the highest achievements of artists. Japan and China have produced the finest clay sculpture in the world, fo example the 
Glazed clay horses of the Tang dynasty and the terracotta army found buried in the late twentieth century. This consists of hundreds of statues of warriors buried in a shallow underground tomb.
Chinese writing is not pictographic but the characters have a visual element. Chinese art therefore has a strong tradition in calligraphic art. Chinese watercolours have calligraphic brushstrokes made quickly which represent plants, landscape, particularly mountains, and sometimes animals and birds. 
Since Buddhism did not depend on graphic illustration, religious iconography never became an intrinsic part of daily life. However Buddha was widely represented in statue form, from the smallest pocket carving to the largest stone or metal figures such as the reclining gold Buddha that is still famous today.
!!JAPANESE ART.
Clay and porcelain modelling is an important element of Japanese art, seen in the ceramics of the Sung and Ming eras which reached a pinnacle of excellence which was not surpassed anywhere else. Japanese ceramics are famous all over the world and their influence continues to be seen in contemporary ceramics and mass produced porcelain both in the form and in the decoration. Japanese ceramics were an intrinsic part of the tea ceremony, an important daily ritual in Japanese life.
Japanese watercolours and woodblocks are well known too. The Japanese were skilled in the making of paper and the production of silk. Some of the best art of japans history is made on paper or silk. Although Buddhism has its place in Japan, Confucianism was widely followed, and this was more a philosophical teaching than a religion. No religious iconography was attached to Confucianism.
The opposing but complementary and essential principles of Yin and yang influence much Japanese art. They can be seen in the many representations of landscape and weather, in particular rocky mountains with stylised swirling wind and cloud and in similar sculptures which are large chunks of rock with especially appreciated forms.
Japanese art has a flatness to it, a lack of deep perspective, that has prevailed for centuries. The famous willow pattern, a Victorian interpretation fo traditional Japanese art, shows a never-ending landscape that exists all on one plane. 
!!CHRISTIAN ART.
After the spread of Christianity a new kind of art began to emerge. Christianity was an iconographic religion based on the worship fo a god with a human form, his son, Jesus a human and Mary his mother. The depiction fo these three has given rise to some of the greatest and most influential art in the western world. For a period of several hundred years, from the Medieval period to the seventeenth century and the Enlightenment, most significant art had a religious theme or was commissioned by the Church. The rulers of Europe were considered to rule by divine right, putting art also into the service of the state. 
Early Christian art, such as the Coptic tapestries, the earliest surviving woven textiles that depict Christ and Mary, is simple and shows images of the face of Christ. Wherever Christianity spread, local artists styles were put to the service of the church, resulting in multiple representations of the same three people with local regional and ethnic features. But there are constant elements - God is usually shown as an old man with a white beard, Christ as a young man with long brown hair and a beard and Mary as a young woman with long black or brown hair. 
Judaism, like islam, did not permit representationl in any form, its teachings being transmitted through words and closely prescribed laws governing everyday life. So that for a time early representational art was essentially a chirstian endeavour. In the early medieval period many churches had fresco painting in them and these frescos are some of the earliest surviving paintings that we have today.
Durign the period in which islam, christianity and judaism were expanding, very few people were literate apart from the clergy and members of the ruling classes. Visual imagery was still the primary means of mass communicitaon. The bayeux taperstyr, as late as the elevnth cnetury was made as a piece of news reportage after the fact to tell the story fo the battle of Hastings through images. These images acted as a prompt for the spoken word - a storyteller would stand in the hall in which the taperstyr hung around all four walls and tell the tale. The diagonal marks in the borders of the taperstyr are thought to add some kind of rthymic dynamic to the spoken word.
With the invention fo printing and the dissemination fo the Bible, literacy improved. The disseminaton of visual images through print was more democratic.
!!MEDIEVAL ART. 
In the Middle Ages, the influence of the Romans was still pervasive. Romanesque and Gothic art and architecture dominated norhtern europe, but towards the south the influence of the the moors was seen in spanish and portuguese art. In the east islamic art and architiecture mixed with pockets of christianity and judaism led to a non-rpreserntational art, but in the far east in china japan and in russia, representation was fundamental.

!Bosch Hieronymous.
The Garden of Earthly Delights is an extremely well known painting. It is a small triptych approximately 70 cm tall with a squarish central panel and two rectangular side panels. Bosch's Painting depicts paradise to be an extraordinary place, with dreamlike creatures and objects, some beautiful pink glass spheres, some castles and towers. It could be said to be one of the precursor to the fantasy and science fiction form for its fantastical creations are wholly of the imagination. The painting is very detailed in its composition and painted with the smallest of brushes. 
!Botticelli Sandro.
Italian painter working around1540 best known for his painting The Nativity and The Birth of Venus, and also for his illustrations to Dante's Inferno. The Birht of Venus is one of the most recognised images in the western world due to its frequent use in advertising. The very beautiful Venus is standing in a giant clam shell which floats on the sea, just away from the shore. She is naked but her long hair covers her pubic area. She is surrounded by cherubs who pull the clam shell along by blue ribbons. Pale pink roses fall around her from the sky. The whole painting is rendered in luminous pale colours, blues, pinks and sand colours. 
The Nativity a small painting about 50 cm tall is certainly one of the best known nativity scenes ever painted. The stable is set in a forested landscape, with a timber and straw shelter in the centre of the picture which houses the Holy family. The shelter has no walls. The Mary is seated with Jesus on her lap. Joseph kneels beside her. The shepherds are there. The ox and ass are in the shadows at the back of the stable. Above the thatched roof are angels, arranged in a row, some blowing trumpets or playing harps, their feet dangling, their softly coloured red blue and purple robes falling in folds around them, with gilded belts and halos hovering. Above the angels heaven can be seen though breaks in the clouds, and there are cherubs everywhere. Below the stable is a twisting path with leads to the bottom of the painting crossing horizontally, turning and recrossing, until the flames at the mouth of hell are reached. All along the path are devils poking out of burrows enticing lost souls, they have black skin, horns and forked tails.
A similar but smaller work, The Birth of Ezra, predates this painting.  
Botticelli made a series of drawings to illustrate Dante's Inferno. These show the different levels of purgatory and the sins associated with each level and grahpically illustrate the particular torture or punishment inflicted on the lost souls. The route to heaven is then shown culminating in the entry in to heaven, which is a beautiful garden. The drawings are made for a book, done in dark brown ink and are very detailed.
!Breughel Peter the elder.
Dutch medieval painter 1400s, world famous for his instantly recognisable paintings of the seasons, for example Hunters in the Snow, and there is one showing the summer harvest, one showing spring and one autumn life. In each case paintings show a village scene, with everyday life going on, a large number of peasants, children, domestic and farm animals, buildings. There is activity in every corner of the painting, down to the smallest detail such as a person urinating, or a dog stealing some meat, a couple kissing, children being naughty, someone sleeping. The scenes are realistically painted for the time and are notable for their depiction of the lives of ordinary people with no imposed narrative, no moral or religious overtones, no theme other than the representation of life as it was. The colours, the drawing of landscape, vernacular, architecture , the detail of the clothing, of tools, house hold items, makes these works extraordinary documents of their time. Above all they present four very different atmospheres and moods. The paintings are so famous as to be instantly recognisable whether or not the painters name is known, and to be used on calendars and other merchandise, and in advertising the world over. Details from the paintings are frequently extracted and used in this way.
!Breughel Peter the younger.
!Cranach.
German medieval artist working in the 1300s who painted an altarpiece that was shocking for the time since it accurately depicted the misery suffered by Christ on the cross, the pain and the physical degradation. Cranach also showed the plight of ordinary people of the  time by painting them with festering sores, deformities and other afflictions. He painted very realistically in quite bright colours.
!!RENAISSANCE.
!Cellini Benvenuto.
Italian renaissance sculptor and goldsmith who around 1540 made a bronze statue of the biblical David with which he attempted to rival Michelangelo. He also made a bronze of Medusa. Cellini worked for the Medici's who ruled Florence and he as well known for his skill in the techniques required to make precious objects. Particularly well known is an extravagant salt cellar in the form of a calm shell with Neptune and many sea nymphs. This was stolen in 2003. Cellini wrote an outspoken and lengthy autobiography as a vehicle for his evidently large ego, which was ultimately his undoing, as he fell into a long running dispute with the other sculptors of the Medici court about whose was the best statue of David.
!!BAROQUE.
!Chardin.
Sixteenth century painter of still lives, usually flowers and vegetables.


!!ORIENTALISM.
!!VICTORIAN NEO CLASSICISM. 
and by the nineteenth century in Europe and America neo-classicism and the study of Greek sculpture was a central part of any artists education. The highest accolades were given to those who could best emulate, interpret and appropriate classical Greek art, taking Greek literature as its narrative theme.
Artists were expected to become skilful at drawing in a realistic style, and to be able to draw from life, model and carve the human form with accuracy.
