In the twenty first century it is thought to be difficult to define art. It does not always exist in a gallery. It is not always a solid object or a flat image. It can be imagined, an action, a pledge, existing only temporarily, it can be made by one people or many, it can be an idea which accumulates over time. It can exist in other realities and will exist in realities of which we do not yet know. It is thought not to be the servant of the state, of religion or of ritual, but to exist purely for its own sake. This subjective freedom is highly valued and often disputed. The one constant is that art is made by artists and that it is made for its own sake. It was not always this way. 

!!THE STORY OF ART.

The story of art is the story of the human urge to represent the world. This began before humans had acquired verbal language with the simple drawing of a line in the sand with a finger. In 6000 BC the indigenous groups of prehistoric humans in the continents of Europe, Africa and Asia, the Middle East, the Far East, Australasia and the Americas had not developed any forms of verbal or visual communication. There was no form of representation in the world. But as these peoples evolved and began to acquire language, conceptual and cognitive skills, they began to create tools. The first tool may have been a stick used to draw in the sand, or it may have been a stone used to crack a nut or to kill an animal. 

!!PREHISTORIC ART.

Tools and visual representations are the first evidence we have of the existence of early civilisations. The earliest examples of these have been found in Africa, the home of the Neanderthals from whom all humans are descended. Prehistoric people were developing forms of representation before the discovery of fire. We know this because some of their drawings and tools have survived. Art, or the evidence of people’s urge to record their life, is the oldest surviving evidence of human endeavour. It may be the case that music, probably in the form of rhythm, is an older form of human expression but only drawing, artefacts and objects have permanence. This is why they are assigned such great value in western culture where linear history is the primary means of self definition. Many other cultures do not place the same emphasis on history. Their artefacts and art are different. In the beginning art may have been pure representation. We do not know whether there was a purpose to art other than pure self expression because there are many examples of prehistoric art whose purpose is unknown to us. There are lines drawn in the desert in South America that form geometric patterns visible only from the air, patterns scratched and carved into rock, and the countless temporary forms of expression that have been washed or blown away. 

!!THE STONE AGE.

As humans evolved, their visual representations became part of the rituals they created around the most important aspects of life, fertility, birth, death and the hunting for food. Art began to have a specific function. The earliest surviving images are scratched into stone, and consist mostly of lines, for example the cave paintings at Lascaux in France. These and others like them depict people hunting animals, in the case of Lascaux a buffalo like creature. The paintings are drawn in outline on the wall using paints made of earth and soot based pigments, in ochre, reddish brown and black. There are groups of lines too which are unexplained but seem to function as a way of counting or as a visual dynamic. As prehistoric people developed more sophisticated tools, they discovered a greater variety of ways of making marks. Flints could be chipped to make sharp blades with which to cut animal skin, animal hair, and to pulverise plants, earth and clay. The discovery of fire meant that substances for drawing, painting and modelling could be dried, heated, reduced, distilled and fire provided soot, ash, charcoal and light. 

!!THE IRON AGE.

Iron age people had a much greater range of tools and implements. They had begun to fashion utensils and to make personal adornments from metal, as well as tools and weapons and with these came the development of decoration. Objects began to have greater value and the degree and type of their decoration began to be significant. At the same time Iron Age people also began to acquire language. One of the first groups to produce metal vessels for eating and drinking was the Beaker people. Often these objects were decorated with images of animals, vitally important as a source of food. 

!!ABORIGINAL ART.

In Australasia, the aboriginal people developed an entirely different form of representation. Early aboriginal art was a language of symbolic representation in which pattern and symbol is used to represent the world. Drawings were made using different colours of sand and earth straight onto the ground. These described the land and its spirits, and depicted time as a journey. The drawings were temporary and not always shown to everybody, sometimes even being made in isolation. Different cultures developed different views of the world according to their geographical location, the climate and the food that was available to them. During the Iron Age people from other continents developed along different paths leading to a material expression of cultural difference. 

!!THE BRONZE AGE.

The smelting of metals led to the discovery of a range of alloys, the first being bronze. These metals could be fashioned more intricately and finely allowing for greater precision and decorative effect such as repeating patterns, beaten metal and thin wire. 

!!EARLY CIVILISATIONS.

The earliest civilisations were formed as people began to travel further in search of food and hospitable land and to encounter other groups both aggressively and peaceably. Humans had previously been nomadic but some groups began to make permanent settlements and with these came buildings and monuments. Cave painting and rock carving had been the only permanent sites for art until the construction of permanent dwellings. Settlement gave rise to the construction of stone buildings, burial chambers and monuments all of which could be decorated or contain representation. For nomadic people portability had been a factor but now larger and heavier objects were produced and people began to make figurative sculptural representations from stone, clay and wood. Stonehenge, the great stone circle in Britain which was built in the Stone Age to celebrate the solstice, is a construction which is not decorated but is not a dwelling. It is an early church. Subsequently buildings that were the focus for ritual whether pagan or religious became the most highly decorated anywhere. Art and architecture began to be closely linked. After the Bronze Age the great early civilisations of the world developed in isolation, reaching their peaks in terms of population, claims to territory and cultural attainment at different periods in history. 

!Pre Columbian art.

The pre Columbian people in south America made some of the most sophisticated early sculpture. Their stone male and female figures have distinctive flattened and squared forms, with large featured faces. Later in South America the Mayan Aztec and Inca civilisations became very skilful in the use of gold. In Africa, the Sumerians and Abyssinians and many other cultures developed widely different forms of visual expression, both in the adornment of the body and dwellings, and in the production of artefacts. 

!!TRIBAL ART.

In all the continents of the world large numbers of people continued to live as tribes, some settled and some nomadic, rarely coming into contact with other peoples and each with its own cultural specificity. Native Americans, semi nomadic peoples who lived off the plains of America, used leather, beads, feathers and wood, and are today customarily symbolised by the Totem Pole, a ritual sculpture. Melanesian and Polynesian peoples that depended on the sea for their livelihood used wood, shells and pounded tree bark to make the tapa cloth which they printed with symbolic designs. Their boats were adorned with the work of their most skilled artists. The Inuit who inhabited the frozen north of America carved from soft stone. The African subcontinent yielded the largest number of distinct tribes, for example the Nuba, Yoruba, Dogon, Masai and Zulu. Africa was one of the culturally richest parts of the world. 

!!EMPIRES.

The earliest civilisations soon built cities and with cities came armies and battles for territory. Soon empires were formed, the earliest being the Byzantine, Ottoman, the Roman empire, the Japanese and Chinese empires which were ruled by successive dynasties. Greece is often referred to as the cradle of civilisation and early Greek culture was the most sophisticated in the world. The development of religions was very significant in terms of the history of art was religion became the focus of a large proportion of artistic activity. 

!!ART AND RELIGION.

Religions divided the world and generated an unprecedented quantity of visual art. Many parts of the world remained pagan, worshipping local gods with their own iconography and ritual. The Greeks, for example, had a complex family of pagan gods and myths. Larger religions began to spread: in the east, Islam, the religion of the Ottoman empire predominated, and in the middle east Christianity. In Asia Hinduism and Islam co existed although not necessarily in harmony and in China and Japan Buddhism and Taoism were predominant. Many Northern Europeans such as the Celts, Norse and the Vikings, were pagans. A burial ship found at Sutton Hoo in Britain contained many examples of Viking art. The ancient Egyptians had their own gods. Art had been an important part of ritual. It now became a servant of the state and of religion and in the process the works that have become known as some of the greatest works of art were created. Artists became the producers of religious iconography but of course in Islamic areas no figurative representation appeared anywhere since Islam does not permit it. 

!!EARLY WRITTEN TEXT.

Writing is a very important influence on art during the period leading up to the birth of Christ and afterward. It is thought that writing was developed by the Sumerians and that Sanskrit may be the oldest written language. The earliest surviving artefacts are the Dead Sea scrolls, written in Sanskrit on papyrus, and the Rosetta stone, an inscribed tablet. Writing was a new way of describing and recording the world which had previously been exclusively visual and for centuries writing was a skill learned only by the very few. Visual imagery remained the primary means of communicating and recording events, but as writing began to tip the balance, art was led to fulfil new functions. 

!!EGYPTIAN ART.

The ancient Egyptians developed an early writing system called hieroglyphics. They were a wealthy trading civilisation with a highly sophisticated system of government and constructed some of the greatest buildings and monuments ever made, the Pyramids, the Sphinx and the statues of the pharaohs in the Valley of the Kings. The Egyptians worshipped deities such as Isis and Osiris and held cats, certain birds and scarab beetles to be sacred. Egyptian art is seen at is most spectacular in the tombs of the pharaohs. They believed in the afterlife, therefore the art that has been found in Egyptian tombs is a good indicator of the life of the living. Egyptian artists were skilled in carving, casting and gold and silver smithing. They had a style of drawing that is very distinctive – all figures are shown with their body facing forward and the head in profile. Hieroglyphs use this style too in the creation of long vertically written texts consisting of pictograms. Egyptian two dimensional art emphasises flatness and uses no perspective but in contrast Egyptian sculpture is very realistic. A cat has been found carved from black stone and wearing a jewelled collar, for example, and countless sarcophagi for mummified pharaohs bare lifelike effigies. The sphinxes and the pharaohs carved on a monumental scale, forty metres high, are in proportion and physiologically accurate. 

!!ETRUSCAN ART.

Etruscan pottery is known for the quality of its form and decoration. 

!!BYZANTINE ART.

The Byzantine empire was one of the largest empires in the world. Byzantine art is valued for the quality of figurative drawing and painting that had developed physiological accuracy, realism and early use of perspective. 

!!GRECO ROMAN ART.

Around 400 BC the Greeks had developed a civilisation that was pre eminent. The Greek system of government was the model for all modern nations. The Greeks had a written language, and a flourishing culture. Greek sculpture was the most realistic in the world, and it was at this time that the idea that art should aspire to realism began to take root. Greek sculptures were generally of white marble or other stone, and often painted in bright colours. The best known Greek sculptures are the Elgin marbles, subject of a protracted battle between Britain, who has possession of them and Greece, who wants them back. The marbles once adorned the frieze of one of the most famous buildings of antiquity, the Parthenon in Athens. The Venus de Milo, a classical Greek sculpture, is perhaps the best known sculpture of the western world, considered to represent perfection of female form and becoming a byword for artistic skill and beauty. It is made in white marble and at some point since antiquity has suffered the loss of its arms. Greek vases are very finely decorated by incising into the black glaze which covers the red clay from which they are made. They are renowned for the quality and realism of the drawing. Greek art was for centuries to be seen as the benchmark for all art, and Classical Greece provided the model for the Roman Empire, whose cultural achievements dominated Europe for centuries after the Empire fell. The Romans built cities, roads and infrastructure on a vast scale and created art to decorate their empire and venerate their leaders. The carved stone Roman portrait bust is a good example, of which there are countless examples surviving. Many archaeological sites have revealed the variety of Roman art, for example Herculaneum, Pompeii, two towns that were destroyed but preserved for centuries by the eruption of the volcano Vesuvius. Mosaic wall decorations and paintings revealed after excavation in the nineteenth century show mosaic floor designs featuring food and fish, and murals depicting sports such as leaping over a bull’s horns and dolphins. Knossos in Crete also has excellent murals, whilst Volubilis and Lullingstone Villa in Britain contain similar but smaller scale work. Roman art spread so widely that it became a dominant style, Romanesque, as artists, artisans and craftspeople adapted and personalized it. Many cathedrals and churches in Europe were built in this style for the next 200 hundred years as Catholicism developed. 

!!ISLAMIC ART.

At the same time in the middle east and in Asia, Islam spread, bringing its own cultural identity to the towns and cities of the Ottoman empire. Islam demanded that there be no figurative representation of any kind, whether in architectural decoration, textiles, book, fabric, painting or sculpture. This was because the word by which the teachings of Mohammed had been handed down, was itself sacred, and so the word became the only permissible imagery. Written text was rendered as decorative design, carving and patter, and calligraphic patterns of remarkable complexity were carved into stone to adorn mosques for example. Carpets for which the area then known as Persia became so famous, depicted animals, plants and buildings symbolically. For centuries there was no art produced in Islamic parts of the world that represented a human face. 

!!CHINESE ART.

By contrast in the far east, home of Buddhism, representational painting and sculpture featured amongst the highest achievements of artists. Japan and China have produced the finest clay sculpture in the world, for example the glazed clay horses of the Tang dynasty and the terracotta army found buried in the late twentieth century. This consists of hundreds of statues of warriors buried in a shallow underground tomb. Chinese writing is not pictographic but the characters have a visual element. Chinese art therefore has a strong tradition in calligraphic art. Chinese watercolours have calligraphic brushstrokes made quickly which represent plants, landscape, particularly mountains, and sometimes animals and birds. Chinese paintings were made on silk that was readily available rather than canvas. Painting on silk required soft small brushes and thin paint. Since Buddhism did not depend on graphic illustration, religious iconography never became an intrinsic part of daily life. However Buddha was widely represented in statue form, from the smallest pocket carving to the largest stone or metal figures such as the reclining gold Buddha that is still famous today. 

!!JAPANESE ART.

Clay and porcelain modelling is an important element of Japanese art, seen in the ceramics of the Sung and Ming eras which reached a pinnacle of excellence which was not surpassed anywhere else. Japanese ceramics are famous all over the world and their influence continues to be seen in contemporary ceramics and mass produced porcelain both in the form and in the decoration. Japanese ceramics were an intrinsic part of the tea ceremony, an important daily ritual in Japanese life. Japanese watercolours and woodblocks are well known too. The Japanese were skilled in the making of paper and the production of silk. Although Buddhism has its place in Japan, Confucianism was widely followed, and this was more a philosophical teaching than a religion. No religious iconography was attached to Confucianism. The opposing but complementary and essential principles of yin and yang influence much Japanese art. They can be seen in the many representations of landscape and weather, in particular rocky mountains with stylised swirling wind and cloud, and in similar sculptures which are large chunks of rock with especially appreciated forms. Japanese art has a flatness to it, a lack of deep perspective, that has prevailed for centuries. The famous willow pattern, a Victorian interpretation of traditional Japanese art, shows a never ending landscape that exists all on one plane. 

!!CHRISTIAN ART.

After the spread of Christianity a new kind of art began to emerge. Christianity was an iconographic religion based on the worship of a god with a human form, his son Jesus, a human, and Mary his mother. The depiction of these three has given rise to some of the greatest and most influential art in the western world. For a period of several hundred years, from the Medieval period to the seventeenth century and the Enlightenment, most significant art had a religious theme or was commissioned by the Church. The rulers of Europe were considered to rule by divine right, putting art also into the service of the state. Early Christian art, such as the Coptic tapestries, the earliest surviving woven textiles that depict Christ and Mary, are simple and show images of the face of Christ. Wherever Christianity spread, local artistic styles were put to the service of the church, resulting in multiple representations of the same three people with local regional and ethnic features. But there are constant elements – God is usually shown as an old man with a white beard, Christ as a young man with long brown hair and a beard and Mary as a young woman with long black or brown hair. Judaism, like Islam, did not permit representation in any form, its teachings being transmitted through words and closely prescribed laws governing everyday life. So for a time early representational art was essentially a Christian endeavour. In the early medieval period many churches had fresco paintings in them and these frescos are some of the earliest surviving paintings that we have today. During the period in which Islam, Christianity and Judaism were expanding, very few people were literate apart from the clergy and members of the ruling classes. Visual imagery was still the primary means of mass communication. The Bayeux tapestry, as late as the eleventh century was made as a piece of news reportage after the fact to tell the story of the battle of Hastings through images. These images acted as a prompt for the spoken word – a storyteller would stand in the hall in which the tapestry hung around all four walls and tell the tale. The diagonal marks in the borders of the tapestry are thought to add some kind of rhythmic dynamic to the spoken word. With the invention of printing and the dissemination of the Bible, literacy improved. The dissemination of visual images through print was more democratic. 

!!MEDIEVAL ART.

In the Middle Ages, the influence of the Romans was still pervasive. Romanesque and Gothic art and architecture dominated northern Europe, but towards the south the influence of the moors was seen in Spanish and Portuguese art. In the east Islamic art and architecture mixed with pockets of Christianity and Judaism led to a non representational art, but in the far east in China, Japan, and in Russia, visual art was representational. 

!Lucas Cranach.

The work of Lucas Cranach, a German medieval artist working in the 1300s is a good example of northern European religious art. Cranach painted an altarpiece that was shocking at the time since it accurately depicted the misery suffered by Christ on the cross, the pain and the physical degradation. Cranach also showed the plight of ordinary people of the time by painting them with festering sores, deformities and other afflictions. He painted very realistically in quite bright colours. 

!Matthias Grunewald.

Grunewald, a German medieval artist working around 1350, is also known for his crucifixion scenes and for the gritty realism of his paintings, extraordinary for the time, and for their use of colour. 

!Hieronymous Bosch.

Another German painter, Bosch, painted a version of heaven called The Garden of Earthly Delights. This extremely well known painting is a small triptych approximately 70 cm tall with a square central panel and two rectangular side panels. Bosch's painting depicts paradise as an extraordinary place, with dreamlike creatures and objects, some beautiful pink glass spheres, some castles and towers. It is an early precursors to fantasy and science fiction illustration, being full of fantastical creations of Bosch’s imagination. The painting is very detailed in its composition and execution. 

!Peter Breughel the Elder.

Breughel’s work depicts medieval everyday life. A Dutch painter working in the 1400s, Breughel is known for his instantly recognisable paintings of the seasons, for example Hunters in the Snow. In each case the painting shows a village scene, with a large number of peasants, children and domestic animals going about their everyday life inside and outside buildings and dwellings. There is activity in every corner of the painting, down to the smallest detail such as a person urinating, or a dog stealing some meat, a couple kissing, children being naughty, someone sleeping. The scenes are realistically painted and are notable for their depiction of the lives of ordinary people with no imposed narrative, no moral or religious overtones, no theme other than the representation of life as it was. The colours, the drawing of landscape, vernacular, architecture, the detail of the clothing, of tools and household items makes these works extraordinary documents of their time. Above all Breughel’s paintings of the seasons present four very different atmospheres and moods. The paintings are so famous as to be instantly recognisable whether or not the Breughels’s name is known, and are used on calendars, merchandise and in advertising the world over. 

!Peter Breughel the Younger.

A Dutch painter related to Breughel the Elder. In the south of Europe, especially in Italy, painters were developing new ways of working. Many such as Piero di Cosimo, Antonello da Messina, Fra Angelico and Piero della Francesca were making frescos or wall paintings in monasteries and churches. 

!Antonello Da Messina.

Da Messina was an Italian renaissance painter who made a painting of Saint Jerome in his study. This shows the room as a box like structure that sits on its own in a landscape, giving the viewer access through the open front wall. What we are seeing is monk’s cell consisting of two linked rooms made of dark coloured wood in one of which the saint is seated at a desk. 

!Piero Della Francesca.

This Siennese painter is perhaps the best known of the Italian late medieval period. In the 1450s Della Francesca painted a number of notable frescos in churches in central Italy, in particular an image of the Virgin Mary, pregnant and standing in a landscape with a tree, that can be seen significantly restored in a tiny village near Siena. His painting of the baptism of Christ shows Christ being baptised by John the Baptist who is standing in a stream wearing a cloth round his loins. The Italian countryside, representing the Middle East, stretches away in the background. Artists from this period understood how to use foreground and background to create a sense of three dimensional space. 

!!THE RENAISSANCE.

The fifteenth century saw a flowering of western culture centred around Italy. The dominance of the Catholic church and the wealth of the ruling families like the Medicis, led to a great number of artists being commissioned to make religious paintings for countless churches as well as many portraits. The artists of this period are acknowledged to be among the greatest in the Western world. Italian artists such as the painters Lorenzo de Ghiberti, Fillipo Lippi, Lorenzo Lotto, Lorenzo Ghiberti and Simone Martini made many paintings depicting scenes from the life of Christ set in the Italian countryside and with Italian architecture and clothes. 

!Lorenzetti.

Lorenzetti’s Good and Bad Government can be seen in Siena. This painting is the width of a room, situated high up near the ceiling and it shows a fortified city on a hill in the distance with its people going about their daily lives. A man on a horse is riding into the image from left in the foreground, the horse has a white coat on and the man is wearing armour. Good and Bad Government is unusual for its depiction of an entire community and its attempt to represent democracy in action in a painting. 

!Giorgione.

Giorgione was an Italian artist who painted The Flagellation of St Jerome, depicting the middle aged saint with a thin sagging body, long grey hair and a beard, alone in penitent pose in his room, naked save for a red cloth around his loins. Jerome is surrounded by symbolic objects and is in the act of scourging himself with a long leather whip. During the Renaissance artists began to study techniques and materials with a scientific approach. New pigments, painting techniques and materials were discovered and casting techniques for sculpture were refined. 

!!THE AGE OF PATRONAGE.

The renaissance was the great age of patronage. Artists who were commissioned by the Church or the State were in a position to afford assistants and to establish studios. They took on apprentices who were employed to draw out paintings, mix colours, prepare canvases, under paint, and often to paint backgrounds – including trees, grass, or patterns on fabric. Many old master paintings are in fact the work of a number of people which has sometimes made attribution difficult. An artist’s assistant might also go on to set up their own studio, and to paint in a very similar style to that of their master, so that it has often been difficult to tell who painted what. If the painter of a particular work could not be established it was often attributed as being painted in a style similar to, or ‘after,’ a certain master painter. 

!Andrea Mantegna.

Mantegna, an Italian renaissance painter, is known for his many great paintings and for his invention of the painting technique grisaille. 

!!PERSPECTIVE.

The discovery during the renaissance which had the most significant effect on painting was that of perspective. This was a landmark in the history of visual representation since it enabled artists to depict three dimensional space for the first time. There were many theories of perspective but the most significant element was the establishment of the vanishing point. This was an imaginary point in the vertical centre of the canvas, about one third down from the top, at which all sightlines from the position of the viewer converged, giving an illusion of three dimensional space. In particular, perspective enabled a far greater accuracy in the depiction of the built environment. Complex theories tried to show that there could be a perspective that enabled the illusion to be effective from every viewing angle. Perspective was essentially an illusion constructed through geometry but in the Renaissance it was thought to be a two dimensional replication of what the human eye actually saw. 

!Leonardo Da Vinci.

One renaissance artist blended science and art more successfully than any other. Leonardo da Vinci is often seen as the quintessential Renaissance Man who defined the era. He worked as a court artist for the Medici family in Venice and did not paint only religious subjects. Da Vinci is arguably the most famous artist in the world, or has certainly made the most famous painting, the Mona Lisa, which has been reproduced by the billion, forged and stolen many times and still draws huge crowds to its site on the walls of the Louvre museum in Paris. This painting depicts a woman shown head and shoulders turned very slightly to one side. She has on a simple yellowish gold dress, a plain necklace and has brown hair. She does not look particularly wealthy. There is a landscape in the background. There is an inscription LHOQ below her on a painted scroll. What made the painting so famous is the woman’s expression, in particular her smile. She seems to be looking straight at the viewer, and has a look of cool calm appraisal, the hint of a smile on her lips. However her eyes seem to be fixed on the viewer wherever they stand in relation the painting, leading to the myth that the Mona Lisa is actually following the movements of her viewers, that she is somehow real. This is an extraordinary achievement for a painting that has come to symbolise great beauty. The term Mona Lisa has almost become an adjective to describe a beautiful woman. The myth attached to the painting has led to many copies being made and to the work featuring in other artists work, in advertising, in newspaper cartoons and is in fact an image that has currency everywhere in the Western World and often beyond. Mona Lisa copies appear in fairgrounds with holes cut for heads so that people can be photographed as her. Automatic photo booths have the Mona Lisa as a backdrop or as a body for the sitter’s head shot. Copies of her with the eyes cut out have been used in films for comedic effect – someone behind the painting will look through the eye hole so that it appears that she is following a person around the room and Marcel Duchamp famously graffitied a moustache onto a reproduction of her. The author of this image succeeded in painting a very beautiful portrait, but it is only one of his achievements. He made many religious paintings and altarpieces. A cartoon for a Madonna and child is particularly well known. He did a vast number of drawings from the models, paying endless attention to hands and feet, eyes or other parts of the body, drawing them separately to get them right. Da Vinci was a polymath and his interests extended to anatomy and engineering. He performed many dissections and recorded what he saw in drawings, expanding his sense of how to draw the human form this way as well as his medical knowledge of how the human body worked, even drawing a foetus still inside a woman’s uterus. Another famous work by Da Vinci is a pen and ink drawing called The Golden Section. A male figure with flowing hair is drawn standing with both arms stretched out horizontally and one leg pointed outwards at an angle. Measured lines radiate from the figure, which represents the proportions taken from the human body used to make perspective and on which architectural construction is based. A copy of this drawing was placed on the Moon by the crew of the Apollo in the 1960s. Da Vinci was also an inventor; he was so interested in the myth of Icarus that he built a flying machine. 

!Sandro Botticelli.

Another well known Italian painter working around 1540 is best known for his painting The Nativity and The Birth of Venus, and also for his illustrations to Dante’s Inferno. Botticelli’s The Birth of Venus is one of the most recognised images in the western world due to its frequent use in advertising. The very beautiful Venus is standing in a giant clam shell which floats on the sea, just away from the shore. She is naked but her long hair covers her pubic area. She is surrounded by cherubs who pull the clam shell along by blue ribbons. Pale pink roses fall around her from the sky. The whole painting is rendered in luminous pale shades of blue, pink and sand colours. The Nativity is a small painting about fifty cm tall and is certainly one of the best known nativity scenes ever painted. The stable is set in a forested landscape, with a timber and straw shelter in the centre of the picture which houses the Holy family. The shelter has no walls. The Mary is seated with Jesus on her lap. Joseph kneels beside her. The shepherds are there. The ox and ass are in the shadows at the back of the stable. Above the thatched roof are angels, arranged in a row, some blowing trumpets or playing harps, their feet dangling, their softly coloured red blue and purple robes falling in folds around them, with gilded belts and halos hovering. Above the angels heaven can be seen though breaks in the clouds, and there are cherubs everywhere. Below the stable is a twisting path that leads to the bottom of the painting crossing horizontally, turning again and again, until the flames at the mouth of hell are reached. All along the path are devils poking out of burrows enticing lost souls; they have black skin, horns and forked tails. A similar but smaller work, The Birth of Ezra, predates this painting. Botticelli made a series of drawings to illustrate Dante’s Inferno. These show the different levels of purgatory and the sins associated with each level and graphically illustrate the particular torture or punishment inflicted on the lost souls. The route to heaven is then shown culminating in the entry in o heaven, which is a beautiful garden. The drawings are made for a book, done in dark brown ink and are very detailed. 

!Van Eyck.

Around the same time, Van Eyck made a painting called the Arnolfini Marriage which is particularly well known. The painting shows a wedding couple standing side by side. The woman is wearing a long dark green dress and holds one hand up, palm toward the viewer. There is a landscape in the background. Sculpture also developed rapidly in the renaissance. Artists began to measure their models with callipers and develop tools, metal alloys and casting and carving methods that enabled them to create realistic simulations of the human form. Sculpture studios had enough employees to enable the handling of large blocks of stone and the construction of foundries. 

!Donatello.

Donatello is one of the greatest renaissance sculptors. 

!Benvenuto Cellini.

An Italian renaissance sculptor and goldsmith, Cellini was working around 1540. His made a bronze statue of David with which he attempted to rival Michelangelo and also made a bronze of Medusa. Cellini was well respected for his skill as a goldsmith and his work was much in demand with the Medici family. An extravagant gold salt cellar in the form of an ornate clam shell containing Neptune and many sea nymphs is particularly well known. The salt cellar was stolen in 2003. Cellini wrote an outspoken and lengthy autobiography which details the rivalry between artists’ studios. 

!Michelangelo.

The greatest renaissance sculpture is generally acknowledged to be a figure of the biblical David which was made by the sculptor and painter Michelangelo to represent ideal male beauty. This white marble figure of a nude man is larger than life, about six metres high, and was radical at the time for its naturalism and the physiological accuracy with which it was modelled. Michelangelo applied the lessons of perspective to the sculpture, making the feet proportionally larger than they should have been. Several smaller versions were made from bronze. This sculpture was much copied and inspired much debate in the studios of Florence. Michelangelo was an Italian artist working in Florence who is universally known as one of the greatest artists of all time, his name often being used to invoke the idea of the highest achievement in art. Michelangelo is as well known for his fresco on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel showing the life of Christ and the ascension into heaven. He was a very skilled draughtsman and created very lifelike figures using colour in a realistic way and painting flowing drapery. The Sistine chapel ceiling was an enormous undertaking and to paint it Michelangelo and his assistants spent a year lying on their backs on scaffolding towers. Images from the ceiling are known all over the world, often used by advertisers, and have become almost generic. One part of the fresco is most frequently reproduced, the image of Christ’s outstretched hand reaching out to the hand of God, their fingers nearly touching. This is an image of great tension and portent, and it seems as if an electrical charge passes from one to the other through their fingers. In the late 1990s the ceiling was cleaned, provoking a great deal of controversy since for centuries the fresco had been darkened and the colours muted. The fresco had been known to visitors and to those looking at reproductions as an antique, parts of which were even obscured from view by centuries of dirt and the breath of millions of visitors. By contrast the cleaned ceiling seems very brightly coloured, even garish. Michelangelo also made a marble sculpture of the Pieta. By the end of the fifteenth century the fame of Italian masters had spread throughout Europe. Artists began to look beyond religious and political subjects to the myths of classical Greece which were sometimes used as metaphors for contemporary events. Classicism was the dominant theme for artists in the sixteenth century such as Poussin, El Greco, Raphael and Titian. Very few artists were women. Artemesia Gentileschi is a rare exception although there may have been more of whom there is no record. 

!Artemesia Gentileschi.

An Italian artist who is the best known woman painter of the classical period, Gentileschi’s most frequently cited work is a portrait of a woman and a painting of the Martyrdom of St Catherine. 

!El Greco.

Most of the well known artists of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries are Italian or Spanish. El Greco, ‘the Greek’, is an exception. He made paintings using loose brushstrokes with bold colours. 

!Caravaggio.

Caravaggio is another classical Italian painter. He painted in a more precise and well worked way than Titian, for example, and was known for his complex compositions. Caravaggio invented chiaroscuro, a way of painting using only the lightness and darkness in a scene. One painting by him shows a scene of bacchanalian revelry, a number of semi clad young men wearing ivy wreaths in their hair. 

!Nicholas Poussin.

A French classical artist who made precisely drawn and richly coloured paintings which have a theatrical atmosphere. The figures in Poussin’s paintings are painted in very bright colours and posed to look as if they are immobile and the scenes he depicts often look staged rather than natural. For this reason he fell out of favour for some time and not much was known about him. Poussin was rediscovered in the early twentieth century by the art historian Anthony Blunt who wrote a catalogue raisonné. 

!Bernini.

An Italian baroque painter who was commissioned to make a great number of altar paintings for churches in the north of Italy. 

!!CLASSICAL REALISM.



!Raphael.

An Italian sixteenth century painter who was influential for his loose and impressionistic way of painting and use of colour, unusual for the period. Raphael was commissioned to make many paintings for churches in Florence. He made a lot of working drawings and drew cartoons from which his paintings were traced. 

!Titian.

Titian is a very influential Italian painter who made many altarpieces for churches in Florence and Rome but also used classical themes which gave him greater freedom of interpretation and therefore the space to experiment. Titian’s style was much emulated, leading to many works being wrongly attributed to him in the twentieth century. He developed a style of painting that, like Raphael’s, was looser and more impressionistic than his contemporaries. Titiian began to show that the surface of the painting and the way the paint is used could be just as important for the viewer as the subject of the painting. It became important that the individuality and singularity of the painter’s touch should be celebrated. Artists began to make paintings that were far more than a presentation of a narrative subject realising that the way paint was applied could reveal as much of the psychology of the subject as could the literal visual interpretation. Titian was one of the pioneers of this way of working, displayed in paintings like ‘The Flaying of Marsyus’, a four metre high painting which shows Marsyus tied to a tree as his flesh is cut off by several men in a crowd. Dogs at his feet feed on his flesh. Titian was also a great colourist and used daring and vivid combinations as can be seen in a crucifixion painted for the cathedral in the Italian city of Ancona. This shows his compositional skill too – like many painters of the time Titian controlled the direction of the viewer’s eye by carefully considered compositional elements, such as the twist of a body, the direction of the gaze of the subjects, the direction of a pointed arm, the flow of drapery and by the use of colour. Diagonal trajectories were popular, so that the viewer might be led into the centre of a painting, and sometimes these became spirals that take the viewer’s eye in several steps to the focal point of the composition. The use of red or another bright colour often indicated the focal point. Titian often depicted Japanese or Chinese ceramics in his interiors, evidence that these were newly imported and popular in Italy at the time. 

!!REALISM.

During the sixteenth century as the European nations vied for power, their monarchies became the main patrons of art. Court artists such as Velasquez painted the ruling families of Europe and had the time and financial backing to break new ground. Artists such as Velasquez, Chardin, or Van Dyck, for example, began to depict real life rather than fictional scenes, mythical or religious subjects, going beyond the formal portrait to paint events, objects and people that interested them. History painting and still life were explored by an increasing number of painters. 

!Diego Velasquez.

A painter by appointment to the Spanish court, Velasquez painted some of the best known works in the history of painting. One of his most popular works shows the King Philip, the queen and the Infanta standing in an informal group with various servants in a room in the royal household looking out at the viewer. Velasquez chose to show the family at home in intimate surroundings, several rooms beyond the room in which they stand visible through a door behind them. The family look out of the painting as if the viewer has trespassed upon them in their private quarters yet they regard the viewer with a challenging cool assurance. The use of perspective and light and shade focuses the viewer’s eye on the Infanta. This painting does not have a literal narrative but neither is it a straight forward family portrait. Velasquez has taken a psychological approach to his subjects which was unusual at the time. Velazquez also painted many portraits including one of King Philip on a rearing horse, and a portrait of the Infanta wearing a lacy dress. The detail of the spectacular red dress, the lace, embroidery and the jewels on it, is painted with thick squeezes of paint which viewed close up seem no more than rapid impressions and the viewer is very conscious of the physical properties of paint on canvas. Viewed from a distance however the apparently crude application of paint is astoundingly like the fabric it portrays. The Rokeby Venus is one of Velasquez’s best known works. It shows a reclining nude with her back to the viewer, her face, which stares directly at the viewer, visible in a mirror held in front of her on ribbons by a cherub with red and white feathered wings. This painting, like the one of the royal family, addresses the psychology of looking at paintings. It gives the viewer access to the subject but ensures by the choice of pose, composition and facial expression that the subject is portrayed as being aware that they are being observed. This ensures that the viewer cannot avoid acknowledging their own subjectivity. 

!!THE STILL LIFE.

Artists had begun to explore new subjects and the still life became an important genre of painting which reached its height in sixteenth and seventeenth century Europe. The still life had many forms, the most common being a table bearing an array of food and drink, a vase of flowers, or an arrangement of objects. The still life allowed the painter to display skill in the way the various items are painted and can be seen essentially as a close 0up view, in contrast to a painting of a scene or a person. The skin of a lemon, the shine and reflection on silver ware, the pattern on a pheasant’s feathers, the weave of a rug, the petals of flowers all gave ample opportunity for displays of virtuosity. A typical food still life might have fruit piled casually on a plate, silver pitchers or goblets, a dead game bird, a candle, knives, glasses, some meat or fish. The food would usually have been chosen to present an impressive display so that anyone who saw the picture would be impressed by how the owner was able to live. Zubaran and Chardin were early exponents of the still life. 

!Zubaran.

A Spanish sixteenth century artist who is known chiefly for his still lifes, Zubaran made several paintings of vegetables such as cabbages and pumpkins. In one such painting an array of vegetables is shown hanging from a line, tied on by string of varying lengths. The vegetables are set against a plain background. 

!Chardin.

Like Zubaran, Chardin usually painted flowers and vegetables and was rigorous in his choice of subject and composition, often making very simple arrangements of one or two items and concentrating on painting them as realistically as possible. Similarly, paintings of flowers were a signal of wealth and many artists added flowers to combinations of other items. Later on the Dutch flower painters concentrated on the flowers alone, filling the canvas with vases of exotic mixed floral arrangements. These were also intended as displays of wealth, for only the richest could afford cut flowers. Some still life painting depicted only objects, perhaps a rustic plate and cup, a book and a lamp, or richly decorated precious items. Kalf, a Dutch artist, painted a suit of armour cast onto a chair by a table covered with gold goblets and plates, the metal glows and shines and reflects fire and lamplight. Kalf’s virtuosity is revealed by a close inspection of the painted shine, made from the tiniest and most carefully applied touches of a range of yellows, whites and ochre. Whereas most still life paintings have no narrative, the vanitas painting is a form of still life which depicts objects with an allegorical or symbolic significance. The vanitas might be painted to celebrate a particular person’s interests and achievements through objects alone, or combined with a portrait of the person. The symbolism in vanitas painting is not always evident and some knowledge is required to interpret them. Skulls make an obvious and frequent appearance to represent mortality, as do books to represent learning, musical instruments, globes, sextants and telescopes to represent travel and the outside world. However more obscure and personal items would have been significant only to the subject or commissioner of the painting and those that knew them. One of the best known vanitas paintings is Holbein's The Ambassadors. 

!Holbein.

An English artist working during the reign of Elizabeth the first, Holbein, like most artists of the time mostly painted to commission, recording the members of and activities of the royal Court. He made several distinctive standing portraits of the Queen including one in which she is wearing a white embroidered dress decorated with pearls, one of her father Henry VIII, and many other people, usually between fifty cm and one metre high. He also painted Sir Thomas More. The Ambassadors is a very well known painting which shows two bearded dressed in doublet and hose with cloaks edged with ermine and hats, standing either side of a sideboard and table. On the furniture are casually arranges various items, tropes, that represent elements of learning and knowledge which are prerequisite to public life. Some of these are obvious, like the globe and compasses, the bible, others more obscure to us today. In the centre of the painting is a curious trompe l’oeil feature. Invisible to the viewer standing in front of the painting but for a smear like element, viewed from a specified angle a skull can be seen. It is speculated that Holbein merely wanted to display his virtuosity, or that the painting was intended to be hung on a stairway where it would be reliably encountered at the requisite angle. Elizabethan artists often specialized in miniature painting. Miniatures were around ten cm high, often oval shaped very detailed head and shoulders portraits. They were used like photographs to carry a likeness of a person around. The miniature had a strategic function too – portraits of possible marriage partners could be conveyed to each party. This was important since marriages between members of the royal family and the nobility were often arranged between different nationalities for political reasons, and the couple would rarely have met before the marriage. During the Elizabethan period, Europe underwent great political upheavals as the Protestant and Catholic churches vied for power. Alliances were forged and broken and the borders of modern Europe were drawn. By the seventeenth century Europe had entered a phase of prosperity. Amsterdam was the centre of the trade in goods from overseas and became a very wealth city. Artists were employed to represent and display the wealth of the new merchant class. Venice was also a wealthy and powerful centre of trade, and it was painted many times by Canaletto. 

!Canaletto.

Canaletto is world famous for his scenes of Venice in panoramic format showing the grand canal and its palazzos with water traffic passing, painted in very accurate detail and bathed in a golden sunlight. Canaletto also spent some time in London and painted the Thames river front, including the Royal Naval College at Greenwich and St Paul’s Cathedral. Canaletto's painting are among the most frequently stolen in the world. The influence of Italian classical sculpture spread and statuary was an essential element in architectural design, interiors and gardens. There were many popular sculptors. 

!Canova.

An Italian classical sculptor who made a work called The Three Graces a two metre high white marble sculpture of three women in flowing robes holding hands dancing in a circle. This sculpture has been stolen once. 

!!DUTCH PAINTING.

Dutch seventeenth century painting depicted domestic interiors inhabited by the merchant class. This was the first time people other than the ruling classes had been able to commission artists because of the new found wealth brought by the import and export business. Painters such as Van Dyck, Rembrandt and Vermeer were not presenting images of authority and power, they were depicting the calm serenity of the domestic sphere, a feminine world inhabited temporarily by men. The paintings reproduced the architecture of the time and some artists such as Saenredam made this their subject. 

!Pieter De Hooch.

De Hooch painted the life of the Amsterdam merchant class in intimate detail. He was painting at a time when this newly wealthy class wanted to display its wealth to the world, but women were still largely confined to the home. Windows were always open with light streaming in to spaces which were otherwise candlelit, and food was plentiful, even fruit (although this was evidently a luxury). De Hooch’s paintings portrayed a range of subjects, for example in one a toddling child reaches up to the mound of apples on a woman’s lap. The woman is sitting on a stool on the stone flagged floor and there is a door leading into a room with a window in it behind her. The child is rosy cheeked and blonde. Another shows a back yard with red bricks laid and plants growing along a wall. The architecture of the houses, the brickwork, the construction of doors and windows, the flooring and soft furnishings are faithfully reproduced. 

!Johannes Vermeer.

Vermeer is famous for his painting The Card Players, which shows a group of people sitting round a table at night, the scene lit by lamp and candlelight. The light glows on the faces of the card players but this is a very dark painting. One of the men in the painting stares out at the viewer. Vermeer painted numerous self portraits showing himself both as a young and old man, but like de Hooch he is best known for his paintings of domestic interiors, for example Woman at a Window and another painting of a woman playing the harpsichord. His interiors usually show a room lit from one side by a window, with a door in an opposite wall. The furnishings are comfortable, the floor is often black and white stone tiles, and the walls panelled. If a man is present he is placed by or looking out of the window. The woman is often seated, and looking at the viewer or into the room although the woman playing the harpsichord is in profile. Vermeer wanted to symbolise the different realms inhabited by men and women in the seventeenth century, the outside world and the domestic space. In Woman at a Window a map hangs on the wall behind the woman, as if to amplify this difference. Woman with A Pearl Necklace is a very well known portrait of a young woman wearing a simple yellow and blue dress with fabric wrapped round her head and a peal necklace at her throat. 

!Rembrandt van Rijn.

Rembrandt is acknowledged to be one of the greatest artists of all time. His paintings are celebrated for their treatment of light and for their psychological approach. He tried to show the personality and mood of the sitter, giving the viewer the opportunity to make an assessment about the kind of person they are looking at. Rembrandt used light to great effect, not just in the way he used painting to represent it but also in his composition, in how he places figures in relation to light sources. One of Rembrandts best known works is The Night Watch a painting of a group of people sitting in the dark with candlelight. Another is Girl at a Window which shows a young girl seated at a table looking up to a window through which light is streaming into the very dark interior. As with most of Rembrandt’s work, light is the subject of this painting. 

!Pieter Saenredam.

Saenredam is noted for his church interiors which are generally quite small. One shows the architecture of the Osterkerk in Amsterdam, with tall stone columns, a floor of black and white squares of marble, and people dwarfed by the height of the building. The composition is deceptively ordinary, apparently showing an everyday view of an interior, but the treatment of light in the painting is skilfull, producing an effect of great serenity. The predominantly black and white painting has its focal point in the black diamond shaped board hanging from one of the columns, concentrating the viewer’s eye on the pattern of black and white, vertical lines and perspective planes in the composition. During the seventeenth century Europe saw much political upheaval and many significant events took place. Artists recorded these events and began to take on a new role as commentators. 

!!HISTORY PAINTING.



!Delacroix.

The iconic image of the revolution is Delacroix’s Liberty at the Barricades. This shows Liberty, the female symbol of France, astride the barricades, a crowd swirling around her, and tricolour flags waving. Delacroix is one of the first artists to represent current events and his work prefigured the realism of the nineteenth century. The French Revolution was a rich source of inspiration for artists and one of the chief exponents was David. 

!Jacques Louis David.

David made one of the first topical political paintings, The Death of Marat. The painting was shown at the time it was made and was a direct interpretation of a recent and controversial event. It was also an innovative composition, showing Marat, dead in his bath by his own hand, the knife with which he had stabbed himself on the floor nearby. Only Marat’s head and shoulders and arm are visible, his arm trailing over the side of the stone bath which is carved from a single block on a pedestal base. The dead man wears a white cloth wound like a turban around his head which lolls on the side of the bath. In his other hand he clutches a book or a letter. His skin is cold and blue. The date is, unusually, inscribed in the corner of the painting, drawing the viewer’s attention to the fact that it was recent history. 

!Theodore Gericault.

Another French artist who made topical history paintings, Gericault is known best for The Raft of the Medusa, a very large (2 metre high) painting which shows a shipwreck scene with the survivors clinging to a raft in a stormy sea. This is a depiction of a real recent event in which sense it was a news picture, conveying very vividly the terror of the survivors so that people could imagine being there. 

!Francisco Goya.

One of the greatest painters in history, Goya is well known for his political paintings including The Disasters of War, The Execution of Maximilian (1814) and a series of works known as The Black Paintings. His paintings are mostly small, around 150 cm high at most. Goya’s intention was to reveal to a wider public the cruelty of war and the harshness of life for ordinary people. He was also an innovator in terms of his use of paint and colour. The Execution of Maximilian (an emperor) shows a blindfolded man on the right of the canvas facing a firing squad on the right side. The scene takes place in front of a hill with some buildings behind it. Smoke is coming from the soldiers’ rifles. The painting depicts the actual moment of execution and was made very soon after the event. Thus it is news reportage, depicting the deposition and execution of a ruling monarch. The Disasters of War are a series of around 30 etchings (about 40 cm high) showing scenes of carnage from the battlefield. Soldiers lie dismembered and disembowelled on the ground, they hang from trees, decapitated or genitally mutilated. Goya intended to show the gross cruelty of war and because he chose to use etching his work reached a wide audience that might otherwise have been able to ignore the black paintings show the life of ordinary Spanish people eking out a subsistence living on the land, living in one room. The paintings are dark and inky, there is no light. They show the harshness and ugliness of life. There is one in the series that shows a dog in quicksand, an ochre sand hill filling most of the canvas with the dog’s head sticking out of it. Eighteenth century Britain was a rural economy ruled by landed gentry. Artists were in demand to record the ownership of land and houses for display by the new English landed gentry !Thomas Gainsborough. One of the best known eighteenth century British artists, Gainsborough, made a painting showing a couple and their children with a hunting dog under a tree with a house in the background. The man wears breeches, a tail coat and a hat, and is leaning on a shotgun; the woman has on a fine low necked dress which is light blue and white with a straw hat. They are dressed in their country clothes, but there is no pretence – this is a painting intended to display the couple’s wealth and social status, showing them confidently engaging the viewer from the rural beauty of their large estate. 

!Joshua Reynolds.

Another English painter of the landed gentry, Reynolds made portraits and landscapes. English landscape painting was particularly important during a period when land ownership was the key to wealth. People commissioned paintings to show how much land they owned. 

!George Stubbs.

Stubbs' name is synonymous with his paintings of horses which are extremely realistically painted, in profile, on a plain background. Other aspects of eighteenth century life are well represented by Rubens and Hogarth. 

!Peter Paul Rubens.

Rubens is known for his paintings of buxom rosy cheeked naked women. Rubens showed groups of women relaxing together, often out of doors, naked or semi clothed. Their flesh is almost expressionistically painted and close to the range of colours used to paint the skin tones can clearly be seen. Rubens draws on the classical nude as inspiration but his nudes are ordinary women. 

!William Hogarth.

From Hogarth, a British artist and political commentator and satirist, we have a comprehensive documentation of eighteenth century London life in his highly detailed drawings and engravings. His engravings of Bedlam, the notorious London hospital for the insane, are famous for their accurate depiction of a horrific place which few people had seen. Hogarth showed the seamy side of life, the injustices and inequities, but contrasted it with images of debauchery, gluttony and indulgence. 

!Franz Hals.

Dutch Eighteenth century painter notably of portraits, Hals’ painting The Laughing Cavalier, a portrait of a man in a large hat with a feather is instantly recognisable. 

!William Blake.

English poet and artist William Blake is known for his visionary drawings and for his illustrated poetry books the Songs of Innocence and the Songs Of Experience. Blake made a drawing with watercolour of god measuring the world with a pair of compasses which has been much reproduced. In the eighteenth century in Europe and America neo classicism and the study of Greek sculpture was a central part of any artist’s education. The highest accolades were given to those who could best emulate, interpret and appropriate classical Greek art, taking Greek literature as its narrative theme. Artists were expected to become skilful at drawing in a realistic style, and to be able to draw from life, model and carve the human form with accuracy. But by the nineteenth century romanticism was beginning to take a hold and landscape and nature were idealised. 

!Anton Watteau.

A French artist working in the nineteenth century, Watteau made paintings of people in landscapes, often with classical allusions – as was the fashion of the day the aristocracy was fond of acting the peasant (Marie Antoinette, for example) or dressing as mythological characters. The paintings were often portrait commissions. Watteau was particularly good at painting trees – at the time trees in paintings were rendered in much the same way by many artists, often by assistants rather than by the artist. Watteau drew and painted virtually every leaf making the trees in his work very realistic and quite distinctive. 

!Fragonard.

Fragonard is known for his paintings of women and children in the countryside or in a garden. Fragonard’s many portraits depict an idyllic life, as in Girl on a Swing and his many paintings of society women and children in beautiful dresses. Fragonard’s paintings are full of trees, flowers and grass in the background, and the detail of the subjects’ clothes is given great attention. They are painted in a soft, feathery delicate style. 

!Arnold Bocklin.

During the 1960s Bocklin painted romantic landscapes and idyllic pastoral scenes showing shepherdesses and their swains in ribboned clothes with the occasional piece of statuary. Like Watteau he painted trees in great detail. 

!Boucher.

Boucher also painted romantic landscapes. 

!!THE SUBLIME.

The worship of nature found its culmination in the German concept of the sublime, which described nature as vast and never ending, true beauty in which man is almost an irrelevance. The chief exponent of this was Friedrich. 

!Casper David Friedrich.

Freidrich was a romantic painter many of whose works were painted from nature on an island in the Baltic sea off the coast of Germany. He was chiefly known for his interpretation of the Romantic sublime. Friedrich tried to create a rendering of nature so beautiful as to seem almost like heaven. This deeply subjective approach was of great interest to many critics and writers struggling with the idea of authorship, subjectivity and the purpose of art after Kant. The sublime is also dealt with by Mary Shelley in Frankenstein and by English poets such as Wordsworth and Shelley. Friedrich's paintings are usually less than 200 by 100 cm in size. They nearly always feature a solitary figure in a landscape. A typical painting depicts a ruined folly on a hilltop seen on a moonlit night with a figure on another peak in the foreground. One painting shows a figure in a rain and windswept landscape with barren trees, another a figure in a moonlit garden with a balustrade, a classical statue and a broken urn. Friedrich painted in a cool reduced palette and his many dramatic moonlit scenes are rendered in shades of blue and grey. 

!John Martin.

An English artist working in the late nineteenth century, Martin painted a kind of inversion of the idea of the sublime. His visionary scenes depicted humankind struggling with the natural world. An example is a painting of a towering dark black and brown mountain at night in which a huge chasm opened up, a volcanic eruption spewing flames, sparks and lava into the darkness. Dwarfed by this landscape many people are struggling and fleeing from the lava flow and fires. English artists did not engage with the sublime but focused on the rural landscape around them and its inhabitants. 

!John Constable.

Constable was an eighteenth century artist who made one of the most famous English paintings, The Haywain, which shows a country scene in which a cart loaded with hay is travelling down a lane. The cart and the farm workers that it carries is very small in relation to the picture as a whole. The painting consists mostly of trees and bushes, predominantly green, brown and ochre coloured with a blue sky. It is a peaceful image of a summer day at harvest time. Flatford Mill is almost as well known. This painting shows a house on a millpond by a river where trees and vegetation predominate. Constable’s paintings convey specific weather conditions and the time of day very well. They seem to represent an idealised and valued vision of the countryside as a peaceful haven. Constable always added an element of red to each painting, a tiny dot or brushstroke of red paint that served to draw the viewer’s eye into the part of the painting that he wanted them to focus on. It might be the roof of a distant cottage or, as in the Haywain, a red garment on a person on the cart. Other British painters such as Wilson Steer, Joseph Wright of Derby, John Everett Millais and Samuel Palmer explored both landscape and portraiture during the nineteenth century. In the second half of the century the industrial revolution changed life in Europe dramatically and the rural idyll was no longer given centre stage. Although critics such as John Ruskin held up the values of traditional arts and crafts skills, and the study of classical art, artists on the whole discovered new challenges. 

!Joseph Mallord Turner.

One of the best known British artist, often described as a British impressionist, Turner made semi abstract watercolours and oil paintings of the river Thames and London. He was most interested in depicting weather and light conditions as opposed to landscape or architectural detail. Turner’s paintings are often brightly coloured and made with blurred brushy strokes. He had made one of the river Thames with a rainbow and one of a cloudy sky painted in white and grey. Whistler was very critical of Turner, describing his work as mere daubing. 

!James McNeil Whistler.

A painting of fireworks over the river Thames was said by Whistler’s rival Turner to look as if someone had thrown a pot of paint at the canvas. Whistler made many partings of London, but he also had a house in the Lake District in the north of England and many of his landscapes are painted there, as well as domestic interiors and portraits. Whistler also painted murals, for example one at Plas Newydd, the home of the Marquis of Anglesey, in Wales. He prided himself in being able to paint very fast. During the nineteenth century the styles of historical periods were being appropriated by contemporary artists. Classicism, realism and romanticism were broad spectrums that included artist working in diverse ways. Some movements were more specific in their aims and distinct in their visual output. 

!!THE PRE RAPHAELITES.

The Pre Raphaelites were a group of artists working in England who were inspired by poetry and medieval history. They painted people dressed in clothes inspired by medieval costume but in contemporary fashion, women and men characterised by their full lips and long flowing hair worn parted in the centre and loose. The style of painting was exact and detailed, everything rendered with great realism, the intention being to convey ideal beauty and sentiment. Often the paintings had a decorative border or architectural elements. Pre Raphaelite painting and sculpture was highly stylised and extremely popular. 

!Dante Gabriel Rossetti.

Rossetti was a leading figure in the pre Raphaelite Brotherhood, the society formed by artists and writers interested in working together. These artists produced paintings that looked to medieval art and legend for their inspiration. Rossetti’s Lady of Shallot is a world famous painting of a drowned woman, the lover of King Arthur, floating in a stream. She is face upwards and looks as if she is merely asleep, wearing a long green dress with her hair floating in a cloud around her head and her hands clasped on her breast. Flowers float in the water around her. 

!Ford Maddox Brown.

One of the British pre Raphaelite painters, Maddox Brown made less stylised paintings than Rossetti, for example a painting of a goat in a barren landscape lit by a lurid setting sun, painted in orange, purple and green. The poetic aesthetic extended to other artists. 

!Henry Wallis.

A British nineteenth century painter who is best known for his painting of Henry Chatterton, a boy poet who committed suicide. The boy is shown on a bed with a view of a garden through a window behind him, wearing a white shirt which is loose. 

!Gustav Klimt.

An Austrian artist working at the turn of century in Vienna, Klimt painted highly decorative images of women with particular attention to the reproduction of the patterns on textiles and clothes the models are wearing. He also painted landscapes, giving the same attention to the ‘pattern’ of leaves and flowers, such as in his series The Four Seasons, paintings of woodlands and gardens in seasonal colours. Klimt had a very distinctive style of drawing the figure, giving his almost exclusively female subjects a kind of languid beauty. They are often draped in decadent poses or staring straight at the viewer giving an impression of forthrightness and unabashed hedonism. One example is a painting of a standing woman, her head almost resting on one shoulder, wearing an extraordinarily ornate dress and cloak which has a pattern of multicoloured and gold squares. In fact Klimt's trademark was his use of tooled and flat gold leaf applied to the patterns on fabric in his paintings. He also tended to delineate the shape of the body by the outline of the clothes, so that the figure often appeared to be a solid block. These attributes give Klimt’s work a graphic effect. Another example is a painting of four women who are lying together on a bed. Klimt’s paintings often show women together in intimacy, lying together in an embrace. In this painting the four are intertwined and seen in a kind of false perspective as if from above. It is hardly possible to tell which limbs belong to which head. The fabric of their clothes are mixed together, so that the composition is a swirl of heads, limbs and pattern, creating a kind of round shape within the frame of the canvas. Portrait painters were in great demand in a new social milieu ushered in by the industrial revolution and its resulting new wealth. 

!John Singer Sargent.

Sargent's paintings show fashionably dressed society figures, the fabric of their clothes very realistically painted, skin glowing and hair shining. 

!Berthe Morisot.

French artist Morisot is best known for her portraits and drawings. 

!Gwen John.

John's portraits are subtle and she used a sombre palette. 

!!ORIENTALISM.

Art from Japan, China and the far east, both traditional and contemporary, began to appear in Europe and attracted a great deal of attention. 

!Hokusai.

A Japanese eighteenth century artist who is best known for his painting The Wave, was a master of the woodcut and pen and ink drawing and painting. The towering wave in this work is about to crash down on the surrounding sea, representing the power of nature. Hokusai worked in traditional style but his subject matter was innovative. The Wave has become an instantly recognisable image. 

!Utamaro.

Utamaro’s series of hand coloured woodcuts, the work for which he is best known, depicts a series of explicit sexual acts between men and geisha women dressed in elaborate kimonos. The women and men perform a range of often gymnastic sex acts and could not be shown in public since they were considered indecent. These works are unusual at the time for their representation of enthusiastic and playful sexuality. Overt sexuality was not a subject of art in the eighteenth century. Religious beliefs in Europe would not tolerate the depiction of explicit sexual acts and Victorian Britain did not even permit allusive or veiled reference to sex. A number of artists nevertheless made work on the subject, notably Beardsley. 

!Beardsley Aubrey.

Beardsley was a graphic artist whose finely executed and intricate art nouveau style has become instantly recognisable. Beardsley illustrated Oscar Wilde's book of the tale of Salome, and made a large number of explicit sexual images. Influenced by the art of China and Japan as were many at the time, Beardsley's characteristic flat highly decorative black and white pen and ink drawings made use of patterns on textiles and clothing of his subjects to great effect, and he was an extremely skilled draughtsman. Many artists were influenced by contemporary developments in the new discipline of psychoanalysis, as well as other therapeutic and diagnostic methods of the day such as phrenology. Sigmund Freud was beginning his research into the unconscious which was to have a profound influence on artists in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. 

!Messerschmidt.

Messerschmidt was a German artist who in the 1890s made a series of small modelled heads cast in bronze, about ten cms across, a male head with a number of different expressions, often the features are contorted. The heads are titled by the mood or emotion the face is displaying. Messerschmidt was influenced by contemporary developments in psychology. 

!!REALISM.

French realism profoundly influenced European art. Painters like Courbet, Corot, Greuze and Daumier began to try to represent landscape and the figure as objectively as possible. 

!Gustav Courbet.

The most influential of the early realists is Courbet who is often referred to as the father of realism. Both Manet and Cézanne acknowledged his influence. 

!Corot.

A contemporary of Courbet, Corot is known for his still calm scenes of the French countryside, often featuring roads and tracks and always trees, which he was particularly good at painting and some notable snow scenes. Corot’s paintings are small, no more than sixty cm high. 

!Camille Pissarro.

A French landscape painter who spent some time in London painting the river Thames. Pissarro liked the cool grey light of London. 

!Ingres.

Ingres made a painting of a seated nude which is known all over the world. It is a simple, natural and intimate portrait of a woman seated on a bed with her back to the viewer, a white sheet draped round her hips, and a red patterned scarf wound round her head with her face just visible in profile. It has been remarked that that drawing of the figure is anatomically inaccurate and that if the woman were to stand up her body would be very out of proportion. 

!Auguste Renoir.

Children and women are Renoir’s favourite subjects. His paintings are light bright celebrations of youth, beauty, the countryside, gardens and flowers. He painted himself often, the best known self portrait is one in which he is wearing a white painter’s smock and a brown wide brimmed hat with glasses. Renoir’s nudes are fleshy and sensual, the paint applied to create a fuzzy, slightly out of focus effect. A particularly well known painting shows a little girl with very blonde hair in a dark blue dress standing in long grass and poppies. 

!Gustave Caillebotte.

Caillebotte's landscapes and people are characterised by a richness in the way the paint is applied. A painting of men scraping and polishing a wooden floor is a well known example of his work. The men, wearing dark trousers and white shirts, some wearing caps, are on their knees in a horizontal line across the canvas, working, and the floor has a bright shine on it, created by the daylight streaming through the windows at the back of the room. The painting is mainly dark brown and wood colour, with the windows and the shine on the floor painted in a bluish white. 

!Puvis de Chavannes.

French painter of the early nineteenth century who made a painting of a thin young man with dark hair and eyes who is standing in a small boat on a lake. The man is meant to make us think of Christ. 

!!THE INVENTION OF PHOTOGRAPHY.

The realist painters were working just before photography. There was still no way of picturing the world other than to paint it. When photography was invented it had an immediate effect on painting because of the way a photograph defined a definite edge to an image. In a painting the edge was always mutable and subjective. Manet and Degas began to compose their paintings in a different way, framing what they painted in a way that was closer to photography. 

!Edouard Manet.

The French artist who is often described as the father of impressionism, Manet painted in a realistic way but used paint expressively. Manet took great interest in the way a photograph cropped a scene and noted the difference for a painter, who can choose what to include and where. Manet’s work began to have a new look which was at first shocking but immediately influential. Manet was a prominent member of the community of artists in Paris and was friends with Courbet, Degas, and Monet. Manet painted two very well known works, Olympia, and Dejeuner Sur L’Herbe, as well as Bonjour Monsieur Courbet and the Bar at the Folies Bérgères. This last is a very original painting which depicts a bar at the Folies Bérgères night club, visited and painted by many of his contemporaries, including Toulouse Lautrec, behind which a woman is serving. On closer inspection what the viewer sees is actually the reflection in the mirror behind the bar. Manet has taken this mirror as the edge of his painting and thus we see the woman’s back, some of people at the bar and the bottles which are in front of the mirror. What was striking at the time was that this was a painting of a reflection, and was not what it seemed to be at all. Manet's paintings were startlingly new and inventive. His Olympia (which owes much to Velasquez’s Rokeby Venus) was considered shocking, provoked storms of protests and was rejected from the Paris salon, the official body of recognition for artists. The painting was said to be pornographic and the public was outraged. Olympia is depicted nude, reclining on a couch, with her maid and a cat behind her. She wears a ribbon choker and earrings and seems to be a prostitute. However it was the look on the woman’s face that was controversial – she stares out of the canvas at the viewers, actively acknowledging their presence and thus making them the subject of the work. This was revolutionary, and brought the whole history of the depiction of the female nude in art into question – here a woman meets the viewer’s gaze rather than allowing the viewer unchallenged access to her body in passive acquiescence. Dejeuner Sur L’Herbe, also a reworking of a historical painting, provoked a similar response but soon these two paintings were acknowledged as groundbreaking works. Dejeuner Sur L’Herbe shows a group of young men and women picnicking in the woods, one of the women is naked, reclining casually and staring out at the viewer from the centre of the canvas. The gaze of some of the others is also focused out of the picture plane at the viewer. Bonjour Monsieur Courbet is a painting in which Manet acknowledges his debt to Courbet. He shows himself walking along a country lane, respectfully greeting the passing Courbet who carries a walking stick and wears a hat. 

!Edgar Degas.

Degas is a contemporary of Manet’s who also made use of the photograph in his compositions. Degas is known all over the world for his scenes of ballet dancers rehearsing, which are instantly recognisable and often reproduced in particular as calendars. His paintings are cropped – much like a photograph a figure will be half painted and cut off by the edge of the canvas. He mainly painted women, including several paintings and drawings of women bathing. One of these shows the back of a woman with red hair as she crouches in a tin bath. There is a blue towel next to her on the floor. Degas made many bronze sculptures of ballet dancers, most are quite small ones around fifty cm high, as well as some of curled up dogs. His best known and very popular sculpture The Little Dancer is larger, around two metres high. The little girl is realistically modelled and wears a net tutu, a bodice and ballet shoes. It is rare to find a bronze sculpture which has added clothes. 

!Paul Cézanne.

Known as the father of modernist painting, Cézanne was a French painter working in the mid nineteenth century. He took the ideas of Manet and Courbet and developed a completely new style of painting. Many see Cézanne as the pivotal figure in late nineteenth century painting who laid the ground for Cubism. Cézanne lived in Paris and the south of France in a house called Jas de Buffon in Provence. The Provencal countryside featured in much of his work and Cézanne liked to work out of doors as much as he could. He also painted still lives and portraits. Cézanne was working around the same time as the impressionists, but his ideas took him on a very different route. He had no interest in creating an impression, in depicting light, in optical fragmentation of the image. Rather he was concerned with how the three dimensional world could be rendered on a two dimensional plane. Cézanne was one of the first artists to paint a representative image giving as much importance to the picture plane as to the illusory space of the painting. In his landscapes and still lives he considered how much of an object he could paint, seeing no reason not to paint the parts of an object that could not be seen, to bend perspective, to remake nature. He composed his paintings so that the picture plane seemed to come towards the viewer, using judicious touches of white to control the path of the viewer’s eye. It is in this that he was revolutionary and laid the ground for Picasso and Braque to develop Cubism, for as young artists they were astonished by what Cézanne had done. He gave them the idea that a three dimensional object could be rendered in two dimensions not by creating an illusion, but by unfolding its various planes and presenting them with no relation to the actual physical integrity of the object. Cézanne was also daring in his use of colour. He never covered the ground of the canvas completely, always leaving parts of it bare to function as a part of the painting as a whole. He applied colour with an abstract sensibility, for its own sake as part of the painting, rather than as a part of a faithful depiction. He used the juxtaposition of pure colours to create shadows of other colours. A number of paintings are immediately associated with Cézanne. The Bathers (a number of works bear this title) are a group of female nudes in a variety of poses, their bodies represented as planes in a landscape. The painting is brown and green, the bodies flesh coloured. This is Cézanne’s best known and least understood work, and it is the work which has the most influence on other artists. His still lifes of oranges and apples are also characteristic, as are some of his portraits, for example the woman with a green face (the green representing the shadow cast on her face by the hat she was wearing. Most of his paintings are fairly small, under a metre high. He painted the land around his country home endlessly, often making repeated versions of the same view of trees and hillside. He made a small landscape that includes a rectangular water cistern in which there is a mirror image, many paintings of trees including a small painting of a single almond tree in blossom, and views from the house. He often painted his wife, including a notable painting of her in the bath under greenish water. 

!!IMPRESSIONISM.

Whilst Cézanne was investigated the depiction of three dimensional space, a number of younger artists who were influenced by photography were experimenting with a new way of painting. The photograph made realistic and accurate representations by artists redundant, since the photograph could do this quicker and more accurately. This fact, combined with a new acknowledgment of the subjectivity of art and an interest in the psyche, freed artists to try to make impressions of what they saw rather than try to replicate. Broadly speaking, the artist’s role became one of subjective interpretation rather than of objective representation. The most dramatic example of this is the work of a number of painters working in France in the 1880s and 90s. 

!Claude Monet.

Monet is the best known of the Impressionists, and indeed made the painting which gave the movement its name, Impression: Sunrise, a view of the houses of parliament and the river Thames in London. This is a small painting of the river at sunrise, the water reflecting the oranges and pinks of the sun, which is painted as a small orange circle of relatively thick paint. This painting was remarkable for its vagueness in terms of detail, and for the consideration of the nature of the painted surface, so that the sun could be read both as a sun and as a painted circle. Monet was trying to paint an impression of what he saw, as if with eyes half shut, and it is possible that he got this idea through seeing out of focus photographic images. After all the idea of a deliberately blurred image was a radically new one at the time and Monet’s idea changed the aims of painters everywhere. Monet took from Cézanne the idea that an artist might paint what was in front of him but paint less than he actually saw, aiming to reproduce the essence of the view. To this end he developed a very distinctive painting style breaking the scene he was painting into patches of colour, applied without covering the ground of the canvas, using the uncovered white ground to create a shimmering effect. He used colour to paint light as well as solid forms. Along with Matisse and Picasso, on whom he was influential, Monet is considered by many to be one of the greatest artists in the world and one of the founders of modernism and twentieth century painting. Monet made several important groups of works. The Water Lily paintings that he made at his country home in Giverny, a series of façades of Rouen cathedral, and a series of Haystacks. The water lilies series are largely three by four metre semi abstract canvases which depict a pond or lake with water lilies on it using shades of emerald, ultramarine and violet, with bright pink and red highlights on the usually white lilies. The way the paint is applied to construct the image is almost of as much importance as the image itself. A series of paintings of the façade of the cathedral at Rouen was a detailed exercise in and demonstration of impressionist technique. In these works the surface of the painting is encrusted with multicoloured paint, which is visible as a façade only at a distance. There are an immense variety of paintings which represent and exaggerate different light conditions. Monet was unique in his preference for continual repetition of views of the same subject. He also painted a haystack series, notable for their pale blue and lilac shadows, a houses of parliament and Thames series. Impressionism did not impress the Paris salon, leading to the formation of the Salon des Refusés, a place for all those artists rejected by the Salon to exhibit. It soon became recognised that these rejected artists were changing painting forever. 

!Georges Seurat.

Known as the inventor of pointillism, Seurat made a number of large paintings in this style, the best known of which is L’Ile de la Grande Jatte, as well as landscapes and coastal views. Pointillism is a way of painting using only tiny dots of separate colour. These dots merge at a certain distance to create an optical illusion of solid colour although there is a grainy quality to the painted image. L’Ile de la Grande Jatte shows people enjoying themselves on a summer day on an island. In the foreground is a boy in swimming trunks wearing a red hat. Women and children walk in the gardens and under the trees and a group of picnickers sit on the grass. 

!Alfred Sisley.

Sisley was an English painter who spent much time working in Paris. Sisley was the major exponent of the Impressionist style in Britain, painting London and the English countryside. 

!Walter Sickert.

Like Sisley, Sickert painted London in an impressionistic style, although he is not an Impressionist. Sacker’s paintings are all made in a gloomy palette of grey, ochre and brown, the paint thickly applied, showing scenes of London and portraits. Not all French painters worked in the impressionist style. Many artists developed individual ways of working that placed them outside any movement. 

!!SYMBOLISM.



!James Ensor.

Belgian symbolist artist who lived in Ostend where his former home can still be visited. During the 1890s Ensor made a painting of a crowd of people including several in clown masks, one white masked person wearing top hat standing out in the foreground. The painting has a slightly nightmarish effect. 

!Odilon Redon.

Belgian symbolist artist who made paintings, drawings and prints. One of his best known works is a drawing of a black spider. The Dutch artist Van Gogh was not part of any movement. His style was idiosyncratic and he made his work in relative isolation, not knowing success in his own lifetime. 

!Vincent Van Gogh.

Van Gogh came from a poor family and he was supported financially throughout his life by his brother Theo who became an art dealer and bought all of Van Gogh’s early work. Their relationship is well documented by letters. Without Theo, Van Gogh would not have been able to paint and as it was he lived much of the time on very little money. Van Gogh began by drawing and painting what he saw around him, rural scenes from his home village showing people working in the fields. He made his famous charcoal drawing The Potato Eaters, which shows a poor family eating a meagre meal crammed into one room in the semi darkness. Van Gogh moved to his own lodgings in Paris but continued to paint rural life. He also painted his own surroundings, producing another seminal work The Artist’s Bedroom, which shows a small bed, a chair with a straw seat, a pair of boots by the bed. The perspective is exaggerated and the drawing chunky. He outlined the shapes of things, developing what was to become his unique style. He also painted his own boots, which amounted to a self portrait. During his time in Paris and later on in Arles, Van Gogh met many other artists and became particular friends with Paul Gauguin who had a great influence on him. Van Gogh began to paint still life, and in particular flowers, influenced by the fashion for oriental decorative arts which had recently begun to arrive in Paris. He even made a painting of a cherry tree which has Japanese characters round its borders. Van Gogh’s most famous work, also one of the most famous paintings in the world, is Sunflowers, a painting of a number of sunflowers in a vase, the whole done in a palette of ochre, yellow and brown with Van Gogh’s usual thick encrustations of paint and impasto. This work is now priceless. A similar work, Irises, is worth billions. Van Gogh and his close friend the painter Paul Gauguin rented a house in Arles in the south of France where the light was very good for painting, where they lived and worked, both drinking heavily. Van Gogh made many of his best works here but it was in Arles that his increasing depression began to take its toll. He painted the portraits of many local people, including the school master, the postman, a local prostitute who modelled for him, and notoriously his own self portraits. One of these shows him as a red headed bearded man with pale green eyes wearing a suit. But one self portrait is notorious for showing the artist with a bandage round his head covering his ear. He is reputed to have cut off his own ear when drunk and sent it to a woman with whom he was angry. Van Gogh sold only to his brother in his lifetime and his talent was not recognised. This probably contributed to his increasing drinking and ill health. Towards the end of his life he painted a number of landscapes that popular myth supposes presage his death, cornfields with brooding dark skies and black crows flying, the birds painted with black paint squeezed straight from the tube. He often used paint in an unmediated way which was unusual at the time, and it was his use of paint that first brought him to attention, although his subject matter on the whole was conventional. The myths created around Van Gogh’s life have been enhanced by a Hollywood film made in the 1960s in which Kirk Douglas portrays Van Gogh as the ultimate tortured soul putting his life into his art. 

!Paul Gauguin.

Gauguin’s early works were landscapes and portraits. Gauguin was an outspoken person and influential among the artists of Paris. He was a very close friend of Van Gogh and they lived together in Arles in the south of France for a time. Gauguin supported Van Gogh and encouraged him, helping him through periods of madness including the ear dismembering incident. Gauguin’s paintings are mainly bold and colourful figurative works. Towards the end of his life Gauguin moved to Tahiti (where he later died) and painted the works with which he is most readily associated (although they are not necessarily seen as his best), showing Tahitian people, often women, in native dress, with the interiors of traditional homes and beach scenes. The colours he uses are very strong, bold and sun drenched. 

!Pierre Bonnard.

Bonnard’s domestic interiors are painted in warm and subtle shades with soft dabbing brushstrokes, and his attention to the pattern and detail of the textiles in the room is an important part of the whole composition. In one painting a woman is seated at a table at the top of the canvas, the table extending towards the bottom, the perspective elongated which is designed to draw the viewer in and give the impression both of welcome and of distance. Much of Bonnard’s work presents people in solitary and restful states. 

!Edouard Vuillard.

Like Bonnard, Vuillard painted landscapes and domestic interiors. 

!Henri de Toulouse Lautrec.

Toulouse Lautrec was a graphic artist who was friends with many of the artist of fin de siècle Paris. He is best known for his posters for the Folies Bérgère in particular for one showing a row of can can dancers. He was a very good draughtsman and was influence by Chinese and Japanese art. 

!Henri Rousseau.

Rousseau’s painting of a tiger in a jungle has become extremely well known. The jungle is shown as a mass of enormous green leaves and stalks that cover the canvas, below which stalks a partially obscured tiger. There are a number of other animals, birds and exotic blooms. The painting is executed in a faux naïve illustrative style. Rousseau also made a painting of a parade in a French town, he often represented French civic life and was a Republican. 

!!FAUVISM.



!Andre Derain.

Another group of French artists led by Andre Derain and influenced by both Cézanne and Monet painted in a style that they called Fauvism, meaning literally ‘wildness’. They worked in very bright pure colours, using larger areas of colour than the impressionists and plenty of white space, not attempting to create a recognisable image but to reduce the image to a wild approximation of its essential qualities. Although Impressionist painting became very popular, it was the work of Cézanne that inspired the next generation of artists, notably Matisse, Picasso, Gris and Braque to break new ground. 

!!CUBISM.



!Georges Braque.

A French artist born around 1880, Braque, along with Picasso, was the major exponent of Cubism, a new style of painting that fragmented and distorted the image in a radical way. Although he began as a painter of landscapes and portraits, in 1911 Braque made a painting on which he pasted a piece of newspaper, Still Life with a Guitar. It showed a table, a bottle and a guitar but treated all objects as if conventional perspective did not apply, representing them instead with flat planes, areas and shapes. The newspaper signified the presence of a newspaper in the still life, but was not a newspaper and did not look like one. The act of sticking something onto the canvas initiated a revolution in painting, because it destroyed the integrity of the picture plane by acknowledging its physicality as a surface. This had the effect of allowing a painting to be seen as an object as well as a flat representation. No one had ever stuck anything onto a canvas to make part of the image before. Braque’s achievement was to find a new way of representing form. He began to include collage, using old tickets and printed paper (in one painting he uses paper printed with a rattan pattern to signify a cane chair), in another a piece of wood effect paper is used for a guitar for example. He made many such collages often depicting bottles, tabletops and wine glasses with the structural planes of the objects opened out and repositioned, before going on, as did Picasso, to attempt the same thing exclusively with paint. Cubism was a way of representing all the planes of three dimensional objects on a two dimensional plane, to think of every object in terms of the surfaces of a series of cubes for the purposes of painting. This way of looking at the physical world had been initiated by Cézanne. Such a radical restructuring of pictorial space resulted in paintings made in browns and greys initially. Braque sometimes used an elliptical canvas. The paintings gave the impression of crystalline forms with recognisable elements attached, such as a head, an eye, part of a guitar, the side of a bottle, the front of a table, the back of a chair. Gradually Braque began to make a different kind of image becuase the effect of cubism had been to free the picture plane from the constraints of realistic representation and pictorial space. The surface of the canvas became the pictorial space, so that the painting was both a representation and an exploration of surface. 

!Juan Gris.

A painter working at the same time and in a similar way to Braque. It is possible that Gris was the first to use collage on a painting, although Braque is given the credit for this. Gris tended to make small paintings, sometimes using an oval format. He also went on to make Cubist paintings. 

!Pablo Picasso.

The Spanish artist Picasso is considered to be the greatest modern artist in the world. Picasso’s work progressed through a number of different styles, including Cubism, and he made work in a variety of media. His skill at drawing is consistently evident, but he was equally good at sculpture. From Picasso’s early career, his Blue period is the best known. This describes a number of figurative paintings that have a blue light cast on them, for example a boy with a dove in his hand, and a young boy dressed as a Harlequin balancing on a ball. The dove and the clown, particularly Harlequin and Pierrot, were recurring motifs throughout Picasso’s life. In the early 1900s Picasso, along with Braque and Gris, would have seen African sculptures for the first time when a collection was exhibited in Paris. This, combined with Cézanne’s experiments with the picture plane, led the three artists to make the first Cubist works. Although Cubism is most readily attributed to Picasso, it was Gris who in fact made the first Cubist collage. Picasso made a number of these collages featuring bottles, guitars, as well as some small sculptures including one of a shelf with some domestic objects on it made from rough bits of wood and painted with a bobble braid tacked along the front. Picasso made a great number of Cubist paintings, which are rarely more than a metre high and predominantly brownish or greyish. During this period Picasso began to develop his mature style to reach its greatest achievement in two paintings, Guernica and Les Demoiselles D’Avignon. Guernica was painted in 1917 to commemorate General Franco’s massacre of a Spanish village. In it Picasso wanted to show the horror of war and suffering, and he was conscious of making a painting which would get attention. He made the painting immediately after the event and it was intended to be given to the town of Guernica. It is a very large painting, three meters by six, which shows a number of figures based clearly on African sculpture (for example Dogon masks) painted in black, purple, white and grey with everything outlined in black. Guernica is an image of horror, of death and suffering, of weeping women, corpses and maimed bodies. The limbs of the figures are intertwined so that the whole painting operates as an abstract composition as well. This was the first time a modern artist had made a painting that was such an explicit criticism of the government of the day. Guernica was shocking and reproductions of the painting were instantly printed in newspapers all over the world. Les Demoiselles D’Avignon is composed along similar lines but depicts a more pleasant scene of naked women in the countryside, painted in flesh tones and greens. However, the women have the same mask like faces as the figures in Guernica. A film was made of Picasso making this painting, showing how he drew out the figures with continuous lines never once correcting himself or erasing anything. Picasso painted many portraits, often of the various women in his life, including Dora Maar, one of his lovers. These were never flattering, as the Cubist style which Picasso had made his own led to features being rearranged so that an eye might appear on the side of the head and the face be cut in two. Black painted lines delineate everything and colour is entirely unrealistic. Picasso made a great deal of carved and assembled sculpture including a bull’s head made from a bicycle seat with a pair of handlebars for horns. Drawing underpinned everything that Picasso did, and he made a large number of them, in particularly a number of black line drawings of the Minotaur, a myth which fascinated him. Later in he made coloured lithographs that look like pastel drawings. These which are very well known, for example a simple hand holding a bunch of flowers and a dove with an olive branch in its beak. In his exploration of every medium Picasso included ceramics, producing a great many plates, vases, and other objects, that he painted on and he also made a series of tooled and embossed silver platters. 

!Juan Miro.

Picasso’s compatriot Miro took a very different route, making abstract paintings that drew on a variety of sources. Miro uses amorphous shapes reminiscent of microscopic life forms that are painted on a thinly prepared raw linen ground. Thin black lines and spidery nodes connect amorphous shapes in red and blue. Miro borrowed compositional elements from comic strip drawings in particular the American Krazy Kat. He also made collages using images cut from cutlery, tool and machinery catalogues that were often mixed with elements from cartoon strips and then abstracted to produce his paintings. In some ways Miro’s approach had an affinity with the work of the surrealists. Few artists have come close to achieving Picasso’s huge output in such a variety of media. But one French artist made paintings that were as influential as Picasso’s. 

!Henri Matisse.

Matisse is considered one of the greatest artists in the world. His paintings include the famous Dance, an 8 metre by 3 metre panoramic painting of dancing female nudes, radical for its semi abstraction. The pink figures become rhythmic arabesques on the swirling blue ground. Matisse later made the figures into paper cut outs, a form in which he was prolific in later life, using ultramarine paper collaged onto a white ground. With the Snail, a large 4 by 3 metre collage made of a spiral of squares of different brightly coloured pieces of paper within a yellow collaged frame, these cut outs became Matisse's best known work, their graphic simplicity lending itself well to printed reproduction. The blue dancers, their heavy limbs creating a calligraphic pattern, are one of the most recognisable works by a twentieth century artist. Matisse also made a large number of drawings; he had an assured hand, creating very simple drawings often using one continuous line. In his paintings it is Matisse’s use of drawing which sets his work apart. He allowed a drawn edge to define the pictorial space and function both as part of an object or structure and part of the composition, and similarly he left areas of the canvas unpainted, allowing the white of the ground to function as part of the image. Matisse painted restful, joyous and domestic subjects in an entirely unsentimental, intellectual way. His composition was daring, for example the Piano Lesson is a predominantly green and red painting composed of large blocks of colour, the entire painting bisected by a diagonal line, the head of a boy emerging from behind a piano very small in relation to the very large canvas. The painting is figurative but it verges toward abstraction. It is this abstract sensibility and his use of colour which singles Matisse out. A head and shoulders portrait of a woman with a green face shows her with the shadow of her woman’s hat over her face painted in a swoop of emerald green. Matisse made literal translations of what his eye saw, so that if a shadow looked greenish, he painted it green, and if an edge could be made by not painting the canvas, he left it bare. For example, another painting depicts a goldfish in a bowl on a table by a French window opening onto a tiny balcony. The window and room are boldly outlined in black; the goldfish bowl and much else is half painted. The Red Studio is a daring work, showing the furniture and objects in his studio outlined in white (made simply by leaving the canvas white where he wanted the line to be) and some colour, with minimal perspective, resulting in a painting that is a red square of canvas with objects, and some architectural elements such as a pair of shutters floating on it. Matisse also made a number of bronze casts, the best known of which is the triptych The Back, an abstracted human torso viewed from the back, carved in relief as semi cylindrical shapes to represent the two sides of the back and the buttocks, leaving a space in the middle to represent the division caused by the spine. The sculptures were commissioned for a specific interior and were thus made as three bronze wall reliefs. At the turn of the century, the influence of photography on painting was clear. It was also having an effect on sculpture. This period saw some of the greatest sculptors emerge, leaving behind the tradition of copying classical sculpture and measuring from life. 

!!EARLY TWENTIETH CENTURY SCULPTURE.



!Auguste Rodin.

Rodin, a French artist who is considered to be one of the greatest modern sculptors, made his best known works at the turn of the century. Two of these, The Kiss (1901) and The Thinker are known all over the world. Rodin’s achievement was to use traditional stone and bronze cast sculpture techniques to represent movement, and to draw attention to the physical material property of the sculpture as a block of stone. Rodin did not want to make sculpture that looked lifelike but was closer to the impressionists and cubists in his desire to acknowledge surface and material as an important part of the work for its own sake. Rodin saw the plinth as an integral part of the sculpture to be acknowledged rather than seen as an unfortunate necessity, again drawing attention to the sculpture as an object rather than something that should try to replicate reality. He often left parts of the plinth unfinished or made his figures emerge from the stone of the plinth. Although Rodin was able to carve and model the human form with great accuracy he often exaggerated proportions to enhance the impression he wanted a particular work to make, using the tricks of classical sculpture such as perspective and foreshortening. This can be seen very clearly in The Kiss, a white marble sculpture that shows a seated male and female nude entwined in a kiss. The figures are about one and a half times larger than life, their bodies are carved without excess of detail, and the feet and legs are exaggerated. The couple grow out of the stone block on which they sit which is left roughly carved. The Kiss has become a world famous representation of romantic and sexual love. Rodin made several copies and a number of smaller bronze versions. There is a similar bronze of a girl lying on a low plinth, her body at points disappearing into the plinth as though it has not yet been formed. In this work Rodin wanted to express the state of sleep. Rodin’s Thinker is an iconic work, a slightly larger than life size seated male nude with one elbow on a knee, the hand made into a fist on which the bent forward head rests. The sculpture is made in bronze, with a very dark almost black patina and the modelling is relatively rough. It grows out of a plinth about one metre high, raising the seated figure to the standing viewer’s eye level. The Thinker is a representation of existential angst, and gained its reputation by succeeding in the three dimensional representation of a state of mind. It is frequently reproduced, used in advertising or merely invoked in conversation by mimicking the physical gesture made by the figure. This quotation of Rodin’s pose is both a reference to the actual sculpture and more generally to illustrate the idea of intense thought. Walking Man is Rodin’s solution to another challenge – how to represent motion in figurative sculpture. This is a life size dark brown bronze sculpture of a naked striding man who that on the floor on a minimal plinth so that the viewer is on the same level. Rodin made public commissions, the best known of which is The Burghers of Calais, which shows an event in French history in which the civic leaders of the town of Calais were imprisoned. Rodin’s sculpture shows them chained together, standing front to back and forming a melancholy circle, which draws the viewer to it. The sculpture itself forms a cage made by the bronze circle of figures. A statue of the French writer Balzac is a radical departure from contemporary portraiture – Balzac is shown standing, wrapped in a floor length cloak so that only his head is visible. He has wild hair and a fierce expression and the figure leans back at an almost unrealistic angle. A commission for a pair of monumental bronze gates for a public building in Paris resulted in The Gates of Hell, a bronze relief that occupied Rodin for years. It is a densely modelled depiction of purgatory covered with figures, for which Rodin did a large number of sketches and studies in bronze. 

!Constantin Brancusi.

Another artist who considered the plinth to be a part of the sculpture was Brancusi, who lived and worked in Paris at the end of the 19th century. Brancusi’s works were often no more than elaborated plinth shapes, with simple forms placed on them made in plaster, bronze, wood and marble. One of his best known works is Endless Column, a polished bronze column on a wooden plinth made of truncated three dimensional diamond shapes placed one on top of the other, about 10 metres high. He also made a small carved head of a sleeping person which is so smooth and almost featureless as to almost appear to be a large stone. 

!Alberto Giacommetti.

In contrast Italian artist Giacommetti had little interest in the plinth. Giacommetti’s bronze sculptures are extremely elongated usually standing figures, sometimes single figures, sometimes pairs or groups which often imply movement, or seem to be about to walk. They are solitary and isolated figures, reduced to essences of the human form. The sculptures are not more than human height and often much smaller, the heads are tiny, the legs and arms no more than rods of metal, the bodies agglomerations of bronze that seem to serve merely to join the limbs, not much more than 30 cm wide. The sculptures are modelled roughly so that the metal looks as if it has been dripped, dragged and pinched. Giacommetti made a large number of working drawings. 

!Gaudier Henri Brzeska.

Gaudier Brzeska made stone and bronze sculptures, mostly small and medium sized, for example a small dark stone carving of a curled up sleeping fawn. For the first time artists were entirely free to make whatever they wanted, the only constraint being financial. Photography began to be seen as part of an artist’s practise, abstraction was on the horizon, and the old traditions ceased to hold sway. Several major movements carried art into the twentieth century and the period known as modernism. These are surrealism, futurism and dada. 

!!SURREALISM.

Surrealist art was made in the context of the publishing of Freud’s work on the subconscious and of the liberation of art from straightforward narrative or representation of the world. The subconscious mind offered new worlds to explore. 

!Salvador Dali.

This Spanish artist, born in 1900, is with Magritte the most famous of the surrealists and a candidate for best known artist in the world. Dali’s paintings or even details of his paintings are instantly recognisable such as the melted clocks which from a small part of one painting but which are instantly associated with Dali and surrealism. Dali’s surrealism is fantastical, he created dreamlike landscapes filled with distorted objects, nightmarish scenes and apocalyptic wastelands and religious iconography. One painting shows mutant human bones that seem to have a life of their own in a grey green no man’s land, the aftermath of a war. Another shows the crucifixion from Christ’s point of view, showing what he would have seen looking down from the cross, the whole image a luridly coloured hallucination. A landscape with dead trees has clock faces draped on the trees and on the ground apparently melting and dripping. A giant red rose floats in the air above a desert. A telephone receiver is replaced by a lobster. Where Dali’s use of obvious symbolism and his lurid hallucinatory images have made him enduringly popular, his personal eccentricity has only increased his popularity and is difficult to separate from his work. Dali dressed as a dandy, often wearing white and sporting a very long waxed moustache that extended beyond his face and pointed up. He lived with his wife Galia in a house in Spain at Figuera da Foz where the couple were host to many of their contemporaries. Dali is not considered to be the intellectual force behind surrealism, however well known his work has become. This role is given to Breton. 

!Andre Breton.

The most outspoken member and leader of the surrealists in Paris at the beginning of the twentieth century, Breton made paintings and sculpture, and wrote the Surrealist manifesto that set out to define a new kind of art for new times. His best known work is a clothes iron with spikes set into the sole plate. 

!Rene Magritte.

Magritte is the most famous of the Surrealists, and indeed is one of the best known artists in the world. A French painter born in 1850, Magritte’s images are instantly recognisable and attributable, and have been much copied. They have influenced advertising imagery for several decades and continue to do so. Magritte was interested in both visual and textual puns, for example, ‘Ceci n’est pas une pipe’ (this is not a pipe) is inscribed on a painting of a pipe. Many of his paintings feature both words and objects and often the objects are apparently named but the names do not make sense. In this way Magritte's text paintings are both object and subject in the sense that are what they are but the viewer is then told that they are not, leading them to a new consideration of what they are seeing and of what art might do. Many of Magritte's paintings are very well known: a train emerging from a fireplace; an apple obscuring most of the front of a bowler hatted man’s face; an inverted mermaid with a fish’s head and woman’s legs and pelvis; an easel by a window with a painting on it, the painting showing the view through the window; two grey spaceship like objects titled Floating Spheres; and a man’s face which is also a female torso in which the pubic hair is also the man’s beard. These are painted in a highly realistic but flat and stiff style, with a muted palette, smooth, flat and few brushstrokes. The ludicrous juxtapositions of objects and people are nonetheless poetic and leave the viewer hoping that they might actually happen, that the everyday might mix up and become magical, in other words, surreal. 

!Man Ray.

A French surrealist sculptor, painter and photographer working in Paris in the early twentieth century, Man Ray experimented with photography to create unique images, using various methods including placing objects on light sensitive plates and then exposing them to get an image. Man Ray took a well known photograph of Duchamp with a star shaved out of the back of his head smoking a pipe. 

!Meret Oppenheim.

Oppenheim made a sculpture of a fur covered cup, saucer and spoon, as well as one of a pair of white high heeled shoes upside down on a silver salver trussed with string and paper frills on the ends of the heels. She also made a pair of leather gloves, the conventional stitched ridges on the backs of each made to resemble the veins on the back of a hand. 

!Hans Bellmer.

Bellmer made photographs of dolls and parts of dolls arranged in tableaux, as well as sculptures. His work deals with sexual taboo. 

!Lazlo Moholy Nagy.

This Hungarian artist was a contemporary of the surrealists and is best known for a number of pioneering semi abstract films and photographs using architectural form, light and shade. Surrealism provided the context for an avant garde group of artists, performers and writers to produce work that they collectively titled Dada. 

!!DADA.

The dada artists were based in Berlin but drawn from a number of different nationalities. They worked in all media and also made performance and musical work, performing regularly under the name Cabaret Voltaire. The name comes is a combination of a French word for hobby horse but was intended to have no specific meaning. 

!Marcel Duchamp.

Known in the twentieth century as the father of conceptualism, the French artist Marcel Duchamp was among the artists escaping Europe for America to avoid censorship and persecution as Jews. He founded Dada and became notorious for his controversial and usually sculptural works, in particular the ones that became known as ready mades. The notorious Fountain, exhibited at the Armoury show in New York in 1913 was in fact a gents’ ceramic urinal placed on its sided so that it could be said to have the shape of a Buddha or a wall fountain. Duchamp signed the urinal on the front, R. Mutt, (one of the invented punning names that Duchamp used to sign his work). Fountain created a furore because it was a bought object, to which nothing had been added, that Duchamp claimed to make into a work of art merely by the act of signing it and proclaiming authorship. The radical step taken by Duchamp with his ready mades, a cycle wheel attached to the seat of a stool for example or a metal bottle dryer, was to have far reaching implications for art. Duchamp employed pseudonyms and puns as part of his work. He created a female alter ego, Rrose Selavy (a pun on ‘C’est la vie’), who authenticated and signed many of his works including the urinal. He photographed himself dressed as Rrose, a rather unconvincing manifestation. Rrose produced a perfume named La Belle Haleine, literally ‘beautiful breath’, intended as an allusion to its opposite, bad breath, and a pun on ‘La belle Helene’, Helen of troy. Inframince or infrathin was a concept involving the declaration of an invisible or intangible and banal act or action to be a work of art. For example the static friction and the sound of velvet trouser legs rubbing together and the warmth left on a recently vacated seat. Almost as notorious as Fountain was Duchamp’s defaced reproduction of the Mona Lisa. Making a pun on the letters LHGC which appear below the face of the Mona Lisa he wrote that ‘elle a un grand cou’ which translates as ‘she has a fat arse’ and drew a moustache on her face. This re appropriated image became one of the best known images in twentieth century art. Duchamp made a number of bronze and wax sculptures which were casts of male and female sexual parts, taking, for example, a mould from female genitals which gave him a negative from which he cast in bronze rather than make a positive from it. One of Duchamp's last works was L’Origin du Monde, a large peepshow containing a wax female torso, laid on an apparent mossy bank, the head out of view, with the genitals exposed. There is a drawing by Courbet of a nude in a similar pose. The apparently innocent tableau with its celebratory title became due to the voyeuristic way in which the viewer was required to look at it tainted with an atmosphere of illicit pleasure, abuse or even murder. The Large Glass, also known as The Bride Stripped Bare by her Bachelors Even, is a large sculpture comprising a screen print onto two pieces of glass held in a metal freestanding frame which was made in an edition. This is Duchamp’s least understood work and it has always resisted interpretation. The images printed on the glass are geometric rays, lines and a coffee grinder with three buckets that was a motif Duchamp repeatedly returned to and had made several drawings of. The buckets on the grinder are sometimes supposed to represent the bachelors, but in general the meaning of the work remains opaque. Duchamp also made several paintings of the coffee grinder that appears in the Large Glass. Duchamp was photographed by Man Ray with a star shaved out of the back of his close cut hair. He played chess every day of his life. 

!Kurt Schwitters.

Schwitters, a leading Dada artist and poet, invented the concept of Merz, a way of working and making art that he applied to everything he did. The most significant manifestation of this is the Merzbau, the interior of a house of which he transformed in its entirety by constructing organic and crystalline protrusions and projections from timber, wire, plaster and papier maché. The rooms became like white caves or cubist grottos. Schwitters also made the (unfinished) Merzbarn during the time he spent in the Lake District in England, a small stone cottage that he transformed with cement and plaster reliefs. Schwitters began his career as a graphic designer and typographer and produced innovative work using unusual combinations of typefaces. He developed an interest in type as a visual form and much of his later work incorporates type in the form of cut out and collaged letters and drawn text. Schwitters wrote poetry, which he performed at Dada performances and at Cabaret Voltaire. His tone poems consisted mainly of sound rather than words. The best known is titled Caravane, which Schwitters intoned through a megaphone. He regarded his poems as aural images. Schweitzer’s small collages are made from coloured paper, printed paper, cut out printed letters, found images, drawing, paint and other materials. He made a great number of these, mostly postcard sized which just predate Braque’s and Gris’s use of collaged text as part of an image. Schwitters also made three dimensional objects, reliefs and assemblages from found materials, timber, wire and paint. 

!Johannes Baader.

Baader was a German artist involved in Dada and Cabaret Voltaire performances. Baader also worked on his own and carried out a number of extreme public performances, often involving physical risk to himself. He made a lot of pamphlets and distributed them in mass public leafleting actions for which he was frequently arrested. 

!Hugo Ball.

Ball was a leading Dada performance artist and a prominent member of Cabaret Voltaire, instigating many of the collaborative performances and writing many of the poems and scripts for them. 

!Luigi Russolo.

The Art of Noise, Russolo’s orchestra, played at many Cabaret Voltaire performances. Russolo was an experimental musician and composer; there were no conventional instruments in his orchestra, which consisted of household appliances and especially made instruments often producing a deliberate cacophony. Italy produced an avant garde at the turn of the century which bears comparison with Dada but had entirely different stated aims. There had been no Italian surrealism but de Chirico’s painting presented a reflexive view of Italian culture and civic life. 

!Giorgio De Chirico.

The towns and architecture depicted in de Chirico’s work are very distinctive for their deserted atmosphere, as if time stands still and the buildings cast long shadows in a strong sunny light. One painting of an empty town square has a statue of an unspecified man, a tower and an arched arcade or cloister. The shadows cast by the buildings and statue on the yellow ochre ground and under the arcade are black. Another painting has the fallen head of a classical marble statue, very like Michelangelo’s David, seen lying on its side on the ground, with a broken off hand in the background, offering a critique of Italy’s reliance on the culture of its past rather than of the present. 

!!FUTURISM.

In this environment of stultification and Mussolini’s dictatorship, the Futurists, who were based in Milan, wrote a manifesto declaring that speed was their god and that the Future was the only thing worth making art about. They were reflecting the times, in a period when manufacturing design was changing rapidly, people and news could travel fast, and moving pictures were available to entertain everyone. 

!Frederico Marinetti.

The leading member of the Italian Futurist movement, Marinetti was an eccentric didactic who produced many paintings and published texts include several versions of the Futurist Manifesto. He wrote a Futurist Cookbook, in which he declared pasta to be the most important (and futurist) of all food. The book contains many edible recipes including several for pasta, but also some very inedible and often ironic ones involving rose petals and entirely green banquets, for example, with complicated presentation methods. It offers a glimpse into the surprising romanticism of the futuristic movement. Marinetti made several performance works including one in which a set of dining chairs were made to dance on and off the stage. 

!Giacomo Balla.

Balla pursued an obsession with speed in his paintings, trying to find the ultimate way to depict people, animals and objects in motion. A portrait of a dachshund walking with spoke like lines emanating from each of its legs is one example. 

!Umberto Boccioni.

Boccioni is considered to be the best futurist painter and sculptor, much of his work dealing with how to represent speed in two or three dimensions. A bronze sculpture about one metre high called simply ‘Speed’ depicts a striding man, with apparently aerodynamic fin like structures representing trails of movement leading backwards from his limbs and the back of his head. The streamlined helmet shape of his head and the armour like fins give the sculpture a sinister warrior like quality. Boccioni made a head of Mussolini by drawing a profile copied from a photograph and using this as a guide to a piece of wood. The result is a solid object which has the shape of a vase but the unmistakeable profile of a man from whichever angle it is regarded. He also made many paintings of his native Milan usually with lines radiating to represent movement of people and vehicles. 

!Frances Picabia.

Picabia’s work did not follow Futurist prescription but he did have an interest in technological development. Picabia’s work does not fit into any movement but he was very influential and is best known for paintings that depict human machine like figures, abstract paintings and his use of text. Picabia also worked as a graphic designer and designed typefaces. 

!Tamara de Lempicka.

In France, Lempicka painted the newly liberated women of the time. Lempicka appears in her own work, distinctive for her straight bobbed hair with low fringe and fashionable clothes. In the early twentieth century many artists made work that depicted a futuristic world, either utopian or dystopian. Some reflected on the increasingly urban, industrialised way of life. 

!Fernand Léger.

Léger, a French painter, had a distinctive style, painting figures as if their bodies were composed of tubular elements, in shaded greys on a whiter ground with occasional additions of primary colours. Léger’s figures look like metal puppets or robots. Other artists concentrated on the traditional forms of portraiture and still life. 

!Ernesto Modigliani.

The name Modigliani is always associated with a certain type of portrait, typically of a seated woman with an elongated body and stylised face. Modigliani's portraits are contemplative and painted in a sombre palette with black outlines. 

!Giorgio Morandi.

Most of Morandi’s still life paintings depict the simplified forms of domestic objects such as jugs, bottles and vases on plain coloured grounds. 

!Nicholas De Stael.

De Stael also painted simple still lifes using flat bright colours. 

!!EARLY PHOTOGRAPHY.

The work of American photographers in the first few decades of the twentieth century was very influential. They recorded both the social conditions of the depression and the opening up of the vast landscapes of the west. Among them were Edward Weston and William Egglestone who photographed city life. 

!Walker Evans.

Evans took photographs of rural America during the thirties Depression that showed the extreme poverty and suffering of ordinary people. 

!Ansel Adams.

Adams was a pioneer of landscape photography known chiefly for his images of American national parks and wildernesses, such as Yosemite and Yellowstone. When he made these photographs the wildernesses were not well explored and many parts were remote and inaccessible, necessitating many days trekking with equipment to get the images he wanted. The photographs capture the enormity and grandiosity of the landscape and came to represent the American wilderness to the rest of the world. Because of their huge scope and precise depth of field they seem to be photographic records of time passing, although of course they only record a moment in time. An example is a photograph of the central valley in Yosemite which shows a huge waterfall cascading down the opposite side of the valley. In Europe, photographers like Eugene Atget and Bill Brandt were recording events, and Brassai was beginning to make abstract images. 

!Andresz Kertesz.

The Eastern European photographer Kertesz made images that became instantly familiar, including one of the Arc de Triomphe in Paris. Seen from a bird’s eye view there is snow on the road surface and the tracks of the few vehicles on the streets have inscribed black parabolas around the arch on the white ground. 

!Claude Cahun.

Cahun was a French photographer who made a number of self portraits in which she is dressed as a man without disguising her sexual identity. 

!!THE MOVING IMAGE.

Artists were trying to represent movement in different ways. The Futurists wanted to represent speed and Rodin to create a sculpture of the human form that conveyed movement. The invention of moving pictures was less of an early influence on them than the work of one photographer. 

!Eadweard Muybridge.

At the turn of the century, Muybridge, an American photographer, made a series of photographs of a horse and a man in motion. He took a series of exposures at close intervals, producing an image for every second of movement. The resulting images had a great influence on artists. Muybridge's sequential exposures showed a specific action, for example the components of the movement of a naked walking man and of a galloping horse. In the days before moving pictures, no one had foreseen that movement could be represented photographically, reduced to a sequence of still images, nor had they been able to study movement. Design and architecture were changing rapidly in Europe and America as a new style emerged, known as International Modernism. This was a sleek, unadorned way of building championed by Le Corbusier among others. Modernist architects were, like the futurists, enthusiastic about the future, proclaiming that in the future everybody would have a home of their own, a modular unit or machine for living in. Design schools were established to train a new breed of architects and designers. The Bauhaus and De Stijl are the best known. 

!!THE BAUHAUS.

The Bauhaus was in Berlin and was a multi disciplinary school with a distinct ethos. Students studied across all areas, including theatre design, textiles, ceramics and graphics, as well as architecture and industrial design. Some Bauhaus students went on to become artists. 

!Oskar Schlemmer.

Schlemmer studied at the Bauhaus as a theatre designer and he made a number of sculptural designs for the Bauhaus productions, later becoming an artist. De Stijl was the Dutch design school at which Gerrit Reitveld, the designer of the famous Red Blue Yellow chair, studied. The influence of the painter Mondrian and Russian constructivism can clearly be seen in De Stijl design. 

!Piet Mondrian.

Mondrian was a Dutch artist who began by painting his local countryside, trees and canals before abstracting these scenes and simplifying his palette. Mondrian also experimented with canvas shape, making a series of abstract works on oval canvases that were based on trees in a snowy landscape. These were conveyed as geometric grey and brown marks on a white ground and Cézanne was influenced by them. Mondrian made a series of works on small square canvases painted on a white ground, dividing the canvas into irregular blocks with black horizontal and vertical lines and colouring in some of the resulting squares and rectangles with red, yellow and blue. These works are amongst the most famous abstract paintings in the world. Later Mondrian began to paint patterns using smaller units and areas, for example Who’s Afraid of Red, Yellow and Blue? in 1910, and one titled Subway, which are an homage to the architecture and the new jazz scene of New York. Mondrian's abstract geometric compositions owe something to contemporary Russian constructivists but are significant for their abstraction of landscape into pure geometric form. 

!!CONSTRUCTIVISM.

In Russia, artists began to make paintings and sculpture that were based on architectural form. This was a reaction to the prevailing socialist realist art sponsored by the state, which often amounted to little more than Soviet propaganda. Art served the state by representing rural agricultural life as idyllic but productive, and portrayed the worker as the hero of the day. Artists rebelled by finding a way of working that was entirely different, and most importantly, abstract. Vladimir Tatlin made his spiral staircase monument. Constructivism used geometry, sharp edged straight lines and primary colours, and the artists laid down the principles on which works could be made. It had a great influence on contemporary graphic design and typography, and continued to do so throughout the twentieth century. Constructivism was later taken up by Europeans such as the French painter Victor Vasarely. 

!!SUPREMATISM.



!Kasimir Malevich.

A Russian artist called Malevich developed a form of constructivism that he named suprematism and made primary coloured paintings on white grounds. He painted the famous Black Square in 1910. This work was the logical if daring conclusion of his systematic attention to constructivist principles and is often attributed with marking the beginning of abstraction. It is also a stark political statement that there is nothing left to paint. Black square is simply a square canvas painted black all over. Square canvases were very unusual since they did not lend themselves well to the composition of traditional subjects of painting, landscapes and portraits. The square drew attention to the work itself, not the subject of the work, so that the painting became an object about painting rather than a depiction of something became important. Mondrian soon began to use the square format. Malevich's painting was entirely black which drew attention to the only possible details of his work, the colour of the black and the brushstrokes. The viewer was directed to regard only the physicality of the paint in this work. This may have been more than Malevich intended. 

!Wassily Kandinsky.

Another Russian artist, Kandinsky, is also credited with making some of the first abstract paintings. Whereas Malevich had made a minimal painting, Kandinsky used bright colours and black on a white ground to make expressive gestural flowing marks, giving rise to the term abstract expressionism. He was interested in the relation of music to sound and some of his paintings are attempts to ‘paint’ music. He painted some stage backdrops for experimental orchestral works. 

!!GERMAN EXPRESSIONISM.



!Ernst Ludwig Kirchner.

Kirchner was an early German expressionist painter. His paintings are brightly coloured, with angular stylised figures, and lots of brushstrokes. Kirchner was the founder of an artists’ group called die Brucke (The Bridge), which included Kandinsky among its members. Die Brucke published a magazine of critical texts called Die Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider). The First World War had a profound effect on artists. Oscar Kokoschka, Otto Mueller and others registered their horror at what had happened in their work. 

!Max Beckman.

Beckman was a German artist who painted in an expressionist style, choosing to portray the people and social spaces of the day in Berlin. A self portrait shows him full length, standing glaring at the viewer while wearing a large black overcoat and a hat with a wide brim. Beckman used a lot of black to outline his figures. 

!Otto Dix.

Dix painted the First World War atrocities, including limbless and horrifically injured soldiers, the best known showing two veterans sitting at a café table, one of whom has had his leg blown off, the other has an eyeball hanging out. 

!George Grosz.

Grosz painted the decadence of the Weimar republic at the beginning of the twentieth century and the aftermath of war. 

!Paul Nash.

One of the few British artists who made paintings about the war, Nash showed barren landscapes of the trenches and no mans’ land in a slightly surrealist light, favouring greens and browns and populating his landscapes with skeletal shapes to create an atmosphere of death. 

!Egon Schiele.

Although Schiele did not directly paint about the war, his paintings are uneasy and cheerless portraits that were in tune with the times. The young women and men in Schiele’s work are usually emaciated and have hollow faces and large eyes. His portraits usually show the whole body, sometimes more than one figure, usually naked or semi clothed on pale backgrounds and they are painted with rough brushstrokes and a palette of white with brown, grey and black. Throughout the early twentieth century there were plenty of artists who ignored political events and continued to make art that represented romantic, spiritual or domestic subjects. 

!Balthus.

Balthus is renowned for his domestic interiors and the dreamlike quality of his paintings of young women and girls. He used a restrained palette and the features of his female sitters are flattened and idealised. Balthus continued to paint until he was a very old man. 

!Marc Chagall.

Chagall is a French painter who also designed stained glass. He is usually associated with images of lovers and animals who are sometimes flying. His narrative paintings are executed in a faux naïve style, with soft colours and a sentimental quality. Chagall often painted images of love and marriage, for example one painting shows a bride and groom resting on a giant hen in the sky, with symbols of the artist’s Jewish faith in the background. As well as hens and roosters, Chagall liked to paint horses, for example one painting features a white horse with large green eyes and long eyelashes. Chagall was commissioned to design the stained glass windows for a chapel designed by le Corbusier in the south of France. 

!Raoul Dufy.

Known for his idyllic seaside scenes, Dufy used bright colours and quick gestural brushstrokes. He was commissioned to paint a mural for the head quarters of the national French electricity generating company celebrating the benefits of electric power. He made a large curved panorama showing people going about varying activities in the countryside, the city and at the seaside with electricity pylons linking the different scenes. 

!Robert Delaunay.

Delaunay made semi abstract paintings using bright, luminous colours, usually in small squares. He was married to Sonia Delaunay. 

!Sonia Delaunay.

As well as making light bright coloured semi abstract paintings, Delaunay is known for her designs for woven and printed textiles. 

!Jean Arp.

Arp was a Dutch artist who worked in mixed media and painting, making a lot of wall hung reliefs and constructions using primary colours and white, and simple shapes, usually curved. Arp cut out simple shapes from sheets of timber and glued them to a board, adding other elements and painting the whole thing. 

!Kees Van Dongen.

Van Dongen made semi abstract colourful paintings, applying the paint quite thickly. Nolde and Munch made a new kind of expressionistic landscape painting. 

!Emile Nolde.

The Belgian artist Nolde's expressionistic landscapes and portraits are characterised by very bright colours and impasto. 

!Edvard Munch.

One of the most famous modern paintings, The Scream, was painted by the Norwegian artist Munch. This iconic painting has often been used in advertising and has been stolen several times. Munch had a very distinctive painting style, which gives the appearance of a woodcut at times. He outlined his figures, often painting the background to follow the contours of the person in the painting to add to the outlining. He used strong and often acidic colours in later works, but many of his earlier landscapes use soft colours and monochrome. In The Scream, Munch wanted to suggest both the sound of the scream and the emotion that engendered it. The figure of a screaming person dressed in black, with shocked eyes and hands to open mouth, is seen on a jetty, surrounded by concentric lines of bright colours that seem to represent the sound of the scream. Munch's subjects were either the rural Norwegian landscape or people. There is often a dreamlike quality to his work, as if nothing were quite real; the sun is often a strange colour, shadows are distorted, and elements are coloured unnaturally. The people in Munch’s work always seem to be or to feel that they are alone. A painting of a lake has a setting sun, the reflection of which is a thickly applied vertical yellow stripe on the water. In a lithograph called The Singer a woman dressed in black stands in a room with a piano. The only bright colour in the painting is in the woman’s red hair. At the time The Scream was painted Freud’s theories of hysteria and the unconscious were just becoming known and also influenced the work of the surrealists. Some artists experimented more literally with the subconscious mind. 

!Henri Michaux.

Michaux was a French artist who made small obsessive drawings and written works, dense with scribbling, extremely intricate patterns and landscapes and letters to anonymous recipients written in the smallest of hands, sometimes blanked out after writing. Michaux mainly used pen and ink, often brown ink, and made his drawings under the influence of mescaline, which Michaux believed allowed him fuller access to his subconscious. 

!MC Escher.

The German artist Escher made extremely detailed and precise drawings of fantasy interiors and architecture, using impossible perspective or optical tricks thereby making something appear to change from convex to concave continuously. His work has been frequently reproduced, for example an interior with a staircase descending around four walls that never goes anywhere, a pattern of black and white doves that becomes something else, and a hand drawing itself which becomes a hand drawing itself. The endgame of Esher’s work is characteristic, everything appears to return to itself. Some artists made work in a naïve or faux naïve style. 

!Paul Klee.

The French painter Klee made a large number of small paintings and an enormous range of works on paper, using both drawing and printmaking. Klee habitually used thin drawn lines to make geometric patterns, often repeated triangles or squares with dots, which were coloured and often resemble patchwork. Sometimes these remained as abstract patterns, at other times Klee would draw figures, trees, buildings or animals. 

!Jan Dubuffet.

Dubuffet used sand to roughen the texture of his paint. He painted large simple figures and faces which owed something to African art but also to graffiti. 

!Auguste Maillol.

Maillol's bronze and stone sculptures have solid and rounded forms, as if they cannot escape from the block from which they are carved. The bodies are distinctively simply formed, and even the smaller works have a gentle monumental quality. Artists’ groups were sometimes centred on a particular location. The St Ives group is named after a town in the southwest of England to which they migrated to avoid the Blitz and because the quality of light was very good for painting. Many of them stayed. 

!!THE ST IVES GROUP.



!Barbara Hepworth.

A British sculptor who began working in the 1940s, Hepworth made the work for which she is best known in the artist colony of St Ives in Cornwall, south west England, where she spent most of her working life, along with Ben Nicholson and others. She was also a contemporary of Henry Moore. Hepworth worked in stone, wood and metal, as well as making working drawings. Her sculptures were smooth, often oval forms, which sometimes have holes (or voids) through them. The voids might be spanned by string or wire strung across in parallel lines or fanning out like spokes, as if to create some kind of tension in the object. Hepworth favoured highly polished black or white marble, granite, wood or bronze. The sculptures ranged from small table sized ones, for example three perfectly smooth elliptical forms on a shallow plinth all made of white marble, or an elongated bronze shape standing on its end, to medium sized plinth based works such as the stringed elliptical voids, to large outdoor sculptures that sat on the ground, on stone boulders, or bronze plinths. Hepworth made several large scale public commissions and her work can be seen in London on the façade of John Lewis, a London department store, in various public parks, for example on Hampstead Heath and in Battersea Park, and towering over the piazza of the United Nations building in New York. In most cases these works feature an oval shape often with strings, either in stone or bronze. For the UN building she made a large oval flat shape with a small hole through it, reminiscent of a stone standing on its end, which is placed next to an ornamental water feature. The standing stones and other Stone Age monuments and monoliths that are common in Cornwall were part of her inspiration and Hepworth wanted her sculptures to sit in the landscape in the same way. 

!Ben Nicholson.

Nicholson was a leading member of the St Ives group and a contemporary of Barbara Hepworth who pioneered a style of work that is a cross between constructivism and geometric abstraction. His paintings often have raised areas made by shapes cut from plywood. He used white and grey and added lines and smaller areas of brighter colours. He also made representational works, most of which feature the Cornish land and seascapes. 

!Winifred Nicholson.

St Ives painter. 

!Terry Frost.

A younger British artist who was a member of the St Ives group in the 1950s and 60s. Frost made abstract pattern paintings, using irregular squashed circular shapes in a repeated pattern, in black and white with red, dark green, blue and other colours. Sometimes the paintings would consist of a part of a large solid black circle on one side of the canvas, and a part of a red circle on the opposite side. The clean lines, minimal forms, bright colours and black and white of Frost’s paintings were very in tune with contemporary fashion and design. 

!Naum Gabo.

An eastern European artist who lived and worked in Britain, Gabo made sculptures and maquettes for proposed sculptures from wood, metal, acrylic, wire and thread. Gabo’s formal abstract structures have a strong architectural element in their reliance on apparent tension and cantilevering for their structural strength. They are clearly influenced by Russian constructivism and Suprematism, but they also relate to the sculptural forms of Barbara Hepworth, in which voids and solid form are often given tension by thread or wires stretched across in parallel lines. Most of his work is very small, around 40 cm high. Gabo’s use of very new materials and his architectural forms made him unique in his time, and he developed a body of work that is singular in its devotion to an aesthetic and to material. He also made preparatory drawings and sketches. 

!Peter Lanyon.

A St Ives painter who painted semi abstract landscapes using a lot of green, brown and white. 

!Alfred Wallis.

Walllis painted the harbours, fishing boats and the sea around St Ives, often using an eccentric perspective that combined aerial and frontal views. 

!!THE COBRA GROUP.

This was a group of artists working in Holland who made semi abstract paintings during the 1940s and 50s. 

!Karel Appel.

Appel was the leader of the CoBRA group. His paintings of figures with smiling toothy faces are made with bright colours and lots of impasto. 

!!ABSTRACTION.

Malevich and Kandinsky had given the fullest expression to early abstraction. By the 1940s abstraction was developing fast both in Europe and most particularly in America. Many painters who had begun their careers painting figuratively turned to abstraction, de Kooning being one example. Some made works that were minimal in style, others worked towards abstract expressionism. 

!Willem de Kooning.

An American artist who worked from the 1950s to the 1990s, de Kooning made paintings in a great variety of styles, from figurative to abstract. He is best known for two periods of his work, the first made in the 1950s and consisting of a series of small portraits of women grinning with lots of teeth, painted in an almost impossibly thick and encrusted impasto, the surface of the canvas heavy with blobs of multi coloured paint that project from its surface producing an overall brown colour in combination. Like Rothko, de Kooning did not subscribe to the notion of the artist as knowing subject but to the Kantian idea of pure art. De Kooning’s second well known group of works are the controversial late paintings, made after the artist was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease. These are very large paintings made with thin bright primary colours of paint applied in single brush strokes that barely cover the white primed surface of the canvas giving the impression of a white painting roughly covered in gestural marks. Some critics considered them to be an extraordinary late flowering, others that they were inconsequential in de Kooning's oeuvre due to his mental state. De Kooning is vilified by American artist Paul McCarthy in a film in which McCarthy appears dressed as a paint tube, squirting paint everywhere and chanting ‘de Kooning, de Kooning’ in an infantile way. 

!Josef Albers.

An American painter born around 1900, Albers made geometric abstractions usually based on the square, using dull versions of primary colours. He was interested in the optical effects of colours on each other. Albers was a lifelong teacher of art and as is discussed in Eva Hesse’s posthumously published diary as her professor. 

!Yves Tanguy.

Tanguy was a French artist who made semi abstract paintings showing organic sculptural forms. Tanguy also made kinetic sculptures (the best known of which is in Paris outside the Centre Pompidou) consisting of similar forms that were constructed so that they would be animated by cause and effect, such as wind moving a vane, or water flow. Every movement of the sculpture creates sounds. 

!Ad Reinhardt.

An American artist who made minimal abstract paintings, mostly in grey and black, from the 1960s to 80s. 

!Clyfford Still.

Still’s abstract paintings often have large areas of flat colour to which he adds a contrasting area, the rough edge of which encroaches on the predominant colour. 

!Antoni Tapies.

A Spanish painter who made abstract paintings that resemble doors and walls. Tapies used textural materials and built up the surface of his canvas to create paintings that are almost reliefs, in predominantly natural colours such as dark brown, black and white. 

!Robert Ryman.

Ryman is known as the white on white painter; he only used white paint (although he often used a bright coloured ground). Ryman’s paintings are mostly small, they are neatly made but with quite thick paint and lots of blobs and brushstrokes. 

!Robert Motherwell.

An American abstract expressionist painter who made very big paintings often using a lot of black paint applied with large brushes and leaving other areas as bare canvas. 

!Leon Golub.

American artist born in the 1930s who made abstract paintings. 

!Elizabeth Murray.

An American artist who made wall reliefs and constructions that she called three dimensional paintings. 

!Victor Pasmore.

British artist who made abstract paintings and works on paper. 

!Eileen Agar.

A British artist who made sculptures and reliefs, both abstract and symbolist, as well as some small objects. 

!Mel Bochner.

Bochner’s characteristic works are dull coloured semi abstract cityscapes in a geometric hard edged style. 

!Morris Louis.

Louis is an American artist who is known for his abstract pour paintings made in the 1960s and 70s. Louis developed a technique for pouring paint onto raw canvas and allowing the paint to pool and spread, soaking into the canvas yet allowing the colours to remain distinct from one another. The resulting works usually consist of brightly coloured stripes emanating from one side of the canvas, spreading and blending on the edges, with the texture of the surface of the canvas always visible. 

!Frank Stella.

An American artist who made wall drawings and reliefs, which consisted of painted cut outs arranged as an abstract assemblage on a panel fixed to the wall. 

!Lucio Fontana.

The Italian artist Fontana’s paintings from the 1950s and 60s are abstract, plain and flat coloured canvases with slits cut right through the canvas. Sometimes Fontana added some textural detail, such as painted gravel or wool thread. He used a range of colours from dark reds and blues to bright copper green. Sometimes his paintings are made on egg shaped canvases. 

!Mary Heilman.

An abstract painter born in the 1940s, Heilman makes small paintings of carefully considered abstract shapes, lines and forms exploring endless possibilities of form and colour. 

!Al Held.

Twentieth century American painter. 

!Howard Hodgkin.

Hodgkin is a British painter born in the 1940s who makes abstract paintings. He uses very bright jewel like colours, applied in large, often round, repeated splodges, the paint continuing right off the edge of the canvas onto and round the frame. Hodgkin’s paintings are never larger than 2 metres high. He sometimes uses round and oval shaped canvases. Hodgkin has made work for public commission including a large photomural of brushstrokes that fills the circular facade of an Imax cinema in London. 

!Bridget Riley.

Riley is famous for her Op Art black and white paintings made in the 1960s, work which endures as one of the most recognisable images of the 1960s. She made these paintings by drawing and distorting grids and filling them in with black and white. The distortions create illusions of curves, of shimmering and of motion making the paintings hard to look at. Riley used grids of squares, triangles, as well as dots and ellipses and parallel lines. One painting, one metre high, has a grid of squares that gradually decrease in width as they move toward the centre of the painting, creating the illusion of two vertical chequered cylinders. Another painting, one and a half metres by two metres, has parallel horizontal wavy lines, each line fractionally further to one side of the painting than the next, creating an optical shimmer. A large, two metre square painting has black elliptical dots placed about 30 cm apart on a grid, the angle of each ellipse changing gradually, giving an impression of motion. A triangle pattern creates waves as each of the triangles on the square canvas is progressively tilted along a curved line. Riley made a large number of black and white works before beginning to add one or two colours, for example yellow, red and blue, to the black and white paintings. A horizontal wavy line painting has colour added. In the 1980s Riley began to explore the optical colour blending effects she had created, and made the first of a large number of pure colour works. She ceased to use black and white and has never returned to it. She continued to study the work of Cézanne and to refer to his paintings in her geometric abstractions, many of which draw directly on historical painting. Works from this period are mostly a grid of multicoloured parallelograms, the choice of colour influenced by the source image. These images predate but later seemed to anticipate pixellation. Riley has made many public commissions including applying bands of coloured stripes to the corridors on several floors of a London hospital. During the late 1990s and early 2000s Riley continued to use colour but began to draw much larger shapes. The shapes in her paintings remain hard edged but she ceased to use a grid. The tendencies evident in early twentieth century abstract painting developed into two distinct but complementary movements, abstract expressionism and minimalism. 

!!ABSTRACT EXPRESSIONISM.

The critic Clement Greenberg argued for Abstract Expressionism as the only logical way forward for painting. He supported many of its best exponents, including Pollock. 

!Jackson Pollock.

The best known of the American abstract expressionist painters and arguably the best known modernist painter of all time. Pollock was born in the 1920s and died in the early 70s in a car accident. Pollock began working in the 1950s and at the end of the decade he started to experiment, placing the canvas on the floor and using a brush to pour house paint, not touching the canvas at all. This was a radical step, since no one had ever made a painting without touching the canvas and with so little control over the result. Pollock’s drip paintings caused a sensation. His new method became known as action painting. The photographer Hans Namuth made a seminal film of Pollock showing him pouring paint on the canvas, which included a section filmed from below through glass. The action paintings are up to 2 metres high and very wide and are all composed of an all over ‘pattern’ of drips, applied in a dynamic but highly controlled way, so that a design is evident. Far from relinquishing control, Pollock became master of the technique. The combinations of colours are subtle, usually involving black and white with one or two other colours. One of the best known is Blue Poles, which has two vertical blue stripes amidst the swirling drips. Another, titled One, is a largely black and white composition. Pollock made many public commissions and his work was taken up by the American government as representing the pinnacle of modernist achievement in art. His work was seen as symbolising the freedom of the American way of life. Unwittingly Pollock’s work was used as US propaganda against the Soviet Union, when the CIA covertly funded an international touring exhibition of the work of the abstract expressionists designed to be compared directly and unfavourably with soviet socialist realist art. Pollock was married to Lee Krasner, also an abstract painter. Krasner saw Pollock through many years of increasing alcoholism and infidelity, taking him to live and work in a house on Long Island to help him stop drinking, until she felt compelled to leave him although she continued to care for him. Krasner subjugated her own career to Pollock’s and it seems reasonable to suppose that he was unlikely to have become successful, or to have even made the action paintings, without her support. 

!Susan Rothenstein.

American abstract expressionist painter. 

!Franz Kline.

American Kline’s enormous abstract expressionist paintings usually feature large black gestural marks made with a big brush on a white, or even un primed ground. Much of the ground is left untouched but it becomes an active part of the surface of the painting. 

!Lee Krasner.

American figurative painter who turned to abstraction. She established a foundation in her own and her husband Jackson Pollock’s names, which through its grant making activities contributes to the careers of many artists. 

!Helen Frankenthaler.

American abstract expressionist painter. 

!Barnett Newman.

American painter Newman’s minimal paintings are known for ‘the zip’, a line of a contrasting colour running vertically down the canvas. Newman invariably used one or two solid colours in blocks or bands, often dark blue, black and maroon, but also golden ochre colours and aquamarine, and the zip (red on a dark brown ground for example) animated these, setting up an optical resonance. He spent his whole career painting these and like Rothko was held up as a spiritual painter. One group of paintings on a single theme fills a whole room; they are white on white paintings with elements of black. 

!Mark Rothko.

Rothko is an American painter who is one of the most famous exponents of abstract expressionism. Rothko’s works are simple colour fields, predominantly one or two shades of the same colour or two contrasting colours, often arranged as a wide border with a central section and usually in portrait format. Although the colour is solid, it is roughly painted with an uneven edge so that the colours affect each other optically. Rothko’s paintings are quite large, up to 3 metres high and he sometimes made four works to be shown together. One such installation is a dark red group of paintings consisting of blurred rectangles within borders. This installation provokes a spiritual or contemplative response in many viewers, some of whom say they are moved to tears. These works are often used as exemplification that art can provide a transcendental experience. Rothko referred to his paintings as parts of himself, describing them as skins hung on the wall. 

!!MINIMALISM.

In the late 1950s and early 60s minimalism was an emerging trend in both painting and sculpture. Minimalist sculpture was groundbreaking in it refusal of any form of modelling, and in its use of prefabricated materials. 

!Robert Morris.

An American sculptor who was known for his use of fabricated steel and other metals. Morris made abstract minimal sculptures, which were nearly always cube shapes, about one and a half meters high, open at the top. His series of copper plated boxes shown as a group are particularly well known, as well as a similar series made of mirrored glass. The copper boxes emit a glowing pink reflected light from their interiors. These are contradictory works in terms of their representation of a heavy solid mass by means of emptiness and light. Morris also made sculpture with pieces of heavyweight felt that he scattered on the floor. He collaborated in a live performance with Carolee Schneeman in the 1970s titled Olympia. 

!Richard Serra.

An American artist who is well known for his monumental sculpture in steel, Titled Arc, which was installed in a public plaza in the 1980s. Tilted Arc was a curving steel wall that bisected the plaza and was tilted at a steep angle along its length. It became notorious for the degree of public resistance to it (the sculpture created a detour making the walk across the square longer), and for the fact that a worker was killed when a part of the sculpture fell on him during installation. Serrra’s work consisted of mostly welded steel sculpture, but not always on such a scale. An early video work, Hand Catching Lead, shows the sculptor’s hand trying repeatedly to catch a piece of falling lead, a difficult task which is rarely successful. 

!Donald Judd.

American Donald Judd is one of the most important of the minimal sculptors. He made steel boxes, shelf like structures and repeated units, fabricated with a high attention to detail and immaculately spray painted in a variety of colours. Some sculptures are made of polished metal such as brass, so that they are extremely shiny. The structures and units are ambiguous, suggesting function but obviously non functional. They are either mounted on the wall, in a horizontal line or one above the other, sometimes in ascending sizes, or placed with precision on the floor. The I Beam is one of Judd’s favourite materials; he pioneered the use of pre fabricated steel and modular construction in his sculptures creating simple works that often had a monumental quality. Judd set up a studio and a foundation in Marfa, Texas. 

!Carl Andre.

Andre is another of the leading artists in the generation of American minimalist sculptors that includes Judd and Morris. He is notorious for his ‘pile of bricks’, purchased by the Tate gallery in London in 1980, which was derided in the press for being nothing but a pile of ordinary house bricks. This work, an arrangement of house bricks to form a plinth two bricks thick, was similar to his other works, chiefly floor works consisting of metal tiles arranged in rectangles and lines. It was important for the viewer’s experience of the work that they were free to walk on the sculpture. These works are both self effacing in their near invisibility and grandiose in their ambition. Andre said that they represented footprints of much larger structures. He wanted to imply monolithic structures through minimal and economic means, creating a tension between the monolithic and the invisible. Andre also made a number of text works, some with ‘x’s and ‘o’s typed in rows, and others consisting of concrete poetry made by fitting words into some kind of geometric system. 

!Brice Marden.

American painter of minimal abstract works who made large (often at least 2 by 3 metre) canvases which are painted in muted colours, often grey with one or two contrasting coloured stripes on the edge of the canvas. Marden's work has similar formal qualities to the work of Barnett Newman, although where Newman's work is painterly, Marden’s is hard edged and painted with flat solid colour. 

!Agnes Martin.

Martin’s minimal abstract paintings are usually based on a grid and they are mainly white with pencil thin lines of bright colours. The detail of the painting is barely perceptible from a distance; they are cool, calm and full of light, and rigorous in their execution. 

!John McCracken.

A British artist who makes minimal abstract sculptures in the form of planks and cubes with a high gloss lacquered finish in solid colours. The planks (about 3 metres long, 50 cm wide and 10 cm deep) typically lean against the gallery wall, while other sculptures are hung from the wall. 

!Yvonne Rainer.

An American choreographer who worked with artists such as Robert Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns, as well as musicians such as John Cage on collaborative performance works, for example The Mind is a Muscle, made in 1971. These works were developed largely at the Black Mountain College summer school and at the Judson Church Centre in New York and were unusual in their day for being multidisciplinary. Rainer choreographed dance works based on the repetition of everyday movements eschewing classical dance form and skills. This emphasis on the everyday had its parallels in both minimalism and Pop Art. Rainer later went on to become a filmmaker and in the 1990s made her first feature film. 

!!TOWARDS POP ART.

Artists such as Rauschenberg, Johns and Lichtenstein took the logic of abstraction and minimalism and applied it to everyday objects and images. Their innovations paved the way for pop art. 

!Robert Rauschenberg.

Rauschenberg began his career in the late 1950s and was part of New York pop art in the 60s. He worked in all media and is particularly known for his paintings to which objects are attached. The object would be made part of the painting or in some cases a painting be made part of a sculpture by extending the paint from canvas to object. Rauschenberg’s innovation was to use screen printing as a medium, transferring images onto his canvases even before Warhol did, in particular photographic images from newspapers, cityscapes and street signs, before adding paint and even found objects. One of his best known paintings features a multi layered image of a city with a stop sign, a sign that reads ‘one way’ and architectural elements and abstract areas of colour. Another has a photographic transfer of President Kennedy. Rauschenberg made many works from found images and objects. One painting features a wooden chair attached to the canvas, and in another a single mattress with sheets, pillow and blankets becomes the canvas and is hung on the wall and painted on. Rauschenberg's conceptual painterly abstraction was important in the early development of pop art. He also made many drawings, including notably one called ‘Erased de Kooning’, which was simply that: a drawing by de Kooning erased by Rauschenberg. Rauschenberg worked with Merce Cunningham, the dancer and member of the Judson Church collective of artist and dancers which including choreographer Yvonne Rainer, designing sets, lighting and costumes for dance performances. He would often paint the set and the costumes himself. For one dance work he made a canvas backdrop painted with spots and matching spotted bodysuits for the dancers. 

!Jasper Johns.

American artist born in the 1930s, Johns was one of the artists who made the move from figuration to abstraction in the 1950s, and then in the 1960s began to use recognisable symbols in his paintings, the best known being the American flag. Johns and his contemporary Rauschenberg paved the way for Pop Art. Johns’s target paintings use a circular target motif (the kind used for archery or shooting) of black and white, or red yellow and blue. The paintings are portrait format so that the circular target is placed in the picture plane and there are sometimes other elements in the composition. Johns’s American flag paintings were innovative for their use of a pre existing symbol to make an abstract image; they are simply painted American flags, the stars and stripes covering the canvas edge to edge. These paintings were also significant because at the time the American flag was being burnt by protesters against the Vietnam War. Johns went on to make a proliferation of flag paintings, drawings and lithographs usually in red, white and blue. Then he began changing the colours culminating in a series of black on black and white on white flags, and even an edition of bronze flag table sculptures. Johns also made a series of number paintings, simply painting the numbers zero to nine, drawn using a stencil to fill a large canvas edge to edge. These were made in many versions including white on white. The idea to make an ordinary object into an art object led Johns to make some bronze sculptures, the best known of which are the Beer Cans and the Can of Brushes. These life size replicas are painted in true to life colours. 

!Roy Lichtenstein.

Lichtenstein’s work is among the best known of the American pop artists. He made paintings using images from printed cartoon magazines by taking single frames or even a detail from a frame and enlarging it, initially to about 1 metre high but eventually to a much larger size. He then made a painting from the drawing, reproducing exactly what he saw including any text. Initially the paintings were black and white but Lichtenstein soon moved to use colour. The paintings nearly always feature a person, a part of a vehicle and a graphic or textual depiction of fire, speed or force; they are part of a larger narrative that we are left to guess at. Eventually Lichtenstein began to paint the dots made by the printing process, the dots which are obvious on billboards when they are viewed close up. By making the dots part of the painting Lichtenstein was reproducing both the reproduction and the means of its reproduction and actually painting the printing process. He used the cyan magenta and yellow process colours on a white ground with black. Certain of Lichtenstein’s works are iconographic, for example one of a fighter pilot in a cockpit of a plane that has a yellow flash coming from the fuselage. The text announces the pilot’s thoughts at that moment. Another is of a glamorous woman crying, again with text revealing her thoughts. His style was, and still is, copied, plagiarised and borrowed. 

!!POP ART.



!Andy Warhol.

Warhol is one of the most significant artists of the late twentieth century. He was born in the 1930s and began his career as a graphic designer in his twenties. He was very accomplished at drawing and became an artist. Warhol is best known for his Campbell’s Soup Can paintings and his Marilyn paintings, but these are only a small part of his extremely prolific output. Warhol’s early graphic work included advertisements for shoe shops, clothes shops, children and adult book illustrations, book jackets and packaging. He used pen and ink, colour and sometimes added gold leaf. He began to make screen prints. Warhol became an artist and turned his studio into a gathering place and workshop called The Factory. He made his own work at The Factory but by virtue of his eccentric personality and arresting style began to gather around him a coterie of colleagues, assistants and admirers. Warhol’s hair was bleached white and he was never seen without dark glasses on and in stylish clothes. He was close to the most inspiring people in the fashion, music and art worlds. It is often said that Warhol himself and The Factory are productions of Warhol’s art; certainly Warhol’s persona was unique and The Factory was an unprecedented example of collaborative practice. At The Factory Warhol worked with photographer Billy Name, who documented everything that happened there, models such as Viva and Edie Sedgwick (among others), who were really his muses, actors and any young and beautiful people who interested him. The force of Warhol’s personality and the mystique that he created around himself meant that people were very keen to work with him or to commission him to make a portrait. Warhol was obsessed with fame. Sedgwick and Viva starred in Chelsea Girls, Warhol’s only feature film. Many other short experimental films were made at the factory including Empire State, a single static shot of the Empire State building 24 hours long, that documented the changing light on the building. Warhol said he wanted to make a film that people could watch when they were stoned. The Screen Tests are a series of head and shoulder shots of just about anyone who passed through the doors of the factory, including many who years later became well known, those who didn’t, and those who were well known at the time. Warhol would simply ask the person to sit and look at the camera. Warhol published a groundbreaking fashion, music and art magazine called Interview and made a series of television chat shows for which he interviewed people. Underpinning all this activity was the continuous production of Warhol’s paintings. Warhol took the most ordinary mass produced object and represented it as art, making a photographic silk screen of the label on a Campbell’s soup can. He did this as an anti art gesture, believing like other pop artists that art did not need to have noble subject matter and that art was a commodity like any other. To this end he used images of coke bottles, Brillo pad boxes and cornflake boxes among others to make his paintings, repeating the colour images in rows to cover the canvas, robbing the image of its original meaning. He produced these in multiples, denying them any exclusivity. He also made sculptures of plywood replica Brillo boxes in the same way. Warhol made a screen print from a photograph of Marilyn Monroe to which he added paint by hand on the lips, eyes and hair. He made as many of these as he felt like, painting each one differently. Multiples of the Marilyns, each one always the same size (1 metre high), are often hung in rows and blocks and they have become so famous as to be almost ubiquitous, exactly as Warhol would have wanted. He was attracted to Monroe because of her fame and glamour and made a vast number of paintings of her including a pair of round canvases painted gold, with her image printed in black on one and the other left blank. As well as the Marilyns, Warhol made a large number of paintings of Chairman Mao in the same way. He also made a number of images of an Electric Chair, again made in a wide variety of colour schemes, as well as a Last Supper, and repeated images of Jesus on one canvas. His very numerous portrait commissions, which were a mainstay of the Factory’s finances, included Jackie Onassis, Joan Collins, Elvis and many society and business figures. Warhol also made a number of self portraits, including one with sticking up hair. Towards the end of his life Warhol made some collaborative paintings with Jean Michel Basquiat. He died in the 1980s. 

!Claes Oldenburg.

This American artist is known for his soft sculptures that he began to make in the 1960s. Along with Warhol, Oldenburg was the main pop art sculptor. He worked in a number of different media and also made a large number of working drawings. The soft sculptures are made of canvas or vinyl, sewn and stuffed in the manner of soft toys, and then painted. The sculptures represent vastly enlarged objects such as a light switch made in white vinyl, a drum kit made in painted canvas and a hamburger. Each are accurately scaled up and constructed, but stuffed loosely so that they sag and collapse. The light switch (about one metre square) hangs drooping on the wall, the drum kit (3 metres across) flops in a heap on the floor. Oldenburg also made many painted clay sculptures, roughly modelled and painted, some cast in bronze, of which one of a hamburger is the best known. In the 1970s Oldenburg began to make public sculpture and also made a large number of designs, plans and sketches for monumental works, which were not always realised. These include a 30 metre high lipstick monument, a building based on the head of Mickey Mouse and one based on an electrical plug. 

!Ed Ruscha.

Ruscha became well known in the late 1960s for his paintings of words. Ruscha took the sign and the billboard as his inspiration and made the painted word the subject of his work; he is best known for his painting of the Hollywood sign. Ruscha used a variety of typefaces and three dimensional letters in his work, and also made a series of paintings of words as substance, for example the word ‘oil’ painted to look like oil. He also made landscape paintings to which words are added. Sometimes Ruscha used a (literal or imaginary) diagonal line in his paintings that he attributes to the compositional elements in classical painting. 

!James Rosenquist.

Rosenquist has made some of the largest paintings of any contemporary artist. As a pop artist he is distinguished by his skill for painting on a vast scale acquired during his years as a professional billboard painter, painting images on hoardings above Times Square in New York for example. Rosenquist is known for two paintings in particular, made in 1961, both of which are 4 or 5 metres high and around 25 metres long. F111 shows an American military aircraft, the painted lady on its side, and various other military items alluding to the contemporary Vietnam War protest movement. The other work shows a collage of items of Americana of varying relative sizes, such as hugely enlarged tinned spaghetti, celebrating the emerging consumer culture in tune with the spirit of the times. Rosenquist’s paintings often include the image of an idealised woman. Rosenquist was a contemporary of Andy Warhol and shared much of the same subject matter, but the two artists were unaware of each other’s work until late in the 1960s. Rosenquist continued to work on the same scale throughout his career refining his technique with new digital imaging technology to help it became very far removed from his original billboard style. In the late 1999s onwards, he made a return to the way he had worked in the 1960s. 

!Patrick Caulfield.

On of the best British pop artists, Caulfield is known for his very distinctive hard edged representative paintings of domestic interiors. He chose to paint interiors or elements from interiors such as furniture, lighting and ceramics, and developed a way of making paintings that he never deviated from. Caulfield copies the most basic structure of a scene from a photograph, rendering the forms with the minimum of line possible. He treats light and shadow as solid object and draws both in the same way so that the light from a table lamp will be represented as a solid yellow shape, the shadow behind its shade as a black shape. All the objects in a painting are given equal importance, since every element is treated the same. The outlines are painted in flat acrylic using a schematic, dramatically simplified black outline with the objects, walls, floors, light fittings, furniture being filled in with bright colours. These black lines are vaguely reminiscent of the lead in a stained glass window, yet they also call to mind Matisse’s painting. Caulfield had several favourite subjects, among them the lamp and the vase. He made many small paintings each around 50 cm high of one or two items, as well as many of entire interiors on a larger scale usually 2 metres high or more. His paintings can be seventeenth century Dutch interiors and still lifes; he painted the aspirations of an equivalent social group in his own day. Caulfield’s best known works are some of the simple still lifes, for example a single lamp, a goldfish in a bowl, an ashtray with a cigarette, a vase, an oval mirror which somehow conveys the idea that it is reflective even though it is painted in black and white. The schematic, iconographic way these things are painted makes them deceptively simple to look at. Of his larger works, perhaps the interiors of a Swiss bar, is the best known. This interior is painted mainly in blue (with the usual black outline), which signifies the quality of light in the place rather than the materials of which the furniture is made. In this work Caulfield uses trompe l’oeil, another characteristic technique: the photo mural on the wall behind the banquette seating is painted realistically in that it looks like a view of an actual mountain scenery rather than a schematic representation. Another example in which Caulfield paints a piece of wood grain realistically makes the direct acknowledgment of Braque’s work more explicit. Caulfield never painted a person. 

!Richard Hamilton.

Hamilton is another well known British pop artist who made paintings that are figurative and usually have a realistically painted element to them, perhaps a figure, combined with an abstract, more painterly element. Parts of the paintings are often blurry and watery, painted on un primed or thinly primed canvas. Like many of the pop artists, Hamilton used the techniques of graphic art, such as air brushing and photographic reproduction, in combination with oil painting. This can be seen in the painting of the IRA hunger striker Bobby Sands during the period of his dirty protest made in the 1970s which shows the long haired, bearded Sands in his prison cell in front of a wall smeared with his own excrement. Hamilton used an airbrush to paint the excrement as blurry brown squiggles. Hamilton’s collages are made as sketches for paintings but sometimes are presented as works in their own right, such as Hamilton’s arguably best known work, A Plan for Everyday Living. This shows a montage of a modern domestic interior, an apartment with cantilevered stairs descending into a double height living area with picture windows that are being vacuumed by a body builder dressed only in a frilly apron. 

!Eduardo Paolozzi.

Paolozzi is a British artist who made works on paper and sculpture that could be considered as pop art. Paolozzi specialised in patterns based on a grid of small coloured squares, which are complex and highly decorative, referring both to historical architectural decoration and textile design as well as to 1960s graphic style. He used the same patterning to create cast metal sculptures, often made from aluminium. In the 1980s Paolozzi was commissioned to design the mosaic tiling for the walls of Tottenham Court Road underground station in London. This commission made Paolozzi’s work one of the most frequently encountered public art commissions in the world. 

!Peter Blake.

British pop artist who is known best for his the sleeve design of the Beatle’s Sergeant Pepper album. Blake’s paintings are dense, detailed figurative collage style works. They often contain elements of patterning, decorative borders and are meticulously painted. He often chose to portray British national identity in some way. He included a self portrait in many paintings – he always appears with long hair and a long beard. 

!Jim Dine.

A contemporary of Rauschenberg and Johns in New York in the 1960s, Dine's best known work features his trademark hearts, drawn in outline or painted often in red or pink on white. 

!Robert Longo.

Longo is an American artist who made paintings, drawings and sculptures in the 1970s and 80s. The sculptures are usually complementary to, or even shown as a part of a painted work. Longo made a number of works in two and a half metre high panels arranged in threes and fours, one panel showing a man clothed in a suit apparently falling to the ground (perhaps having been shot), although he could almost be dancing, the other panels blank white or with photographic cityscapes. The pencil and graphite drawing on the panels is very realistic. In some cases there is a bronze cast of a similar male figure placed in front of the wall panels, the best known being of a man ‘falling’, the balance of the sculpture precarious. 

!Robert Indiana.

A screen print and sculpture made by Indiana became the motif for a generation. He placed the letters of the word ‘love’ one on top of the other to form a cube shape with a distinctive slanted letter ‘O’. Pop art was a major movement in twentieth century modern art. Conceptual art had been developing from its roots in dada and surrealism, notably in the work of European artists who had been influenced by these movements such as Klein and Broodthaers. 

!Yves Klein.

Although he cannot be classed purely as a conceptual artist, French artist Klein’s subject was the condition of art, and he made several works that gained him notoriety, in particular the Blue Paintings. These were made as a performance in a gallery in Paris. Klein invited female models to act as human brushes. He applied ultramarine blue paint to their naked bodies and then directed them to position themselves and move their bodies in certain ways, making body prints onto paper he had placed on the floor and walls. Klein’s idea was to use the nude to paint the nude. The resulting body prints were exhibited, but it is the photographic documentation of the event that has become better known. Later on he made some paintings by setting fire to canvases, singeing them and marking them with smoke. Ultramarine blue was Klein’s trademark colour that he used for all of his painted work and sculpture. He made a large number of paintings in the 1950s and early 60s using natural sponges stuck to canvas and painted blue. He also made simple plain blue canvases. Similarly he made sculptures with the sponges, creating tableaux of his flower or seaweed like creations. Klein worked briefly in ceramics, making small sculptures that drew on porcelain table ornaments, lumpen thrown together and glazed versions that nevertheless made their sources clear. The other strand to Klein’s work is more conceptual. He made many works with found objects and works that were events and documentations of actions. He made a work with a light bulb and several works with furniture. The best known of these works is Leap into the Void, a staged photograph in which Klein is seen apparently leaping off a high wall in a street and falling through the air. There is a house on the left and a lamp post behind him. Paris Air is a sealed glass vial containing nothing but air, to which Klein accorded a status as an artwork and a monetary value. In a performance work Klein sold gold leaf which he had authenticated to collectors and then invited them to throw the work they had just bought into the river Seine. He also printed his own bonds, and sold these as works of art. The work that summed up Klein’s interests most completely was The Void, a staged event for which Klein rented an empty gallery. He sent out invitations to the opening of his exhibition, provided champagne and hired a commissionaire to stand on the door. No one was allowed to enter the gallery without an invitation and when they did so they found an empty gallery – the void of the title. 

!Marcel Broodthaers.

Like Klein, the Belgian artist Marcel Broodthaers cannot be defined as a conceptual artist but he draws both from this and surrealism. Broodthaers occupies an eccentric personal world that centres around his Musée des Aigles, and the mussel shell. Broodthaers was something of a surrealist, with his use of puns and irony, and juxtaposition of unlikely objects. He created his own, sometimes impenetrable, lexicon of signs and symbols, and indeed signs were part of his work. He made pressed sheet metal signs displaying diagrammatic objects such as a pipe, with ‘fig 1’ and ‘fig 2’ written underneath. He made a number of small sculptures and wall reliefs using mussel shells stuck together. The Musée des Aigles (Museum of Eagles) contained things that the artist had collected which bore eagles' wings, such as military crests. 

!!CONCEPTUAL ART.



!Hans Haacke.

American Haacke became one of the best known of the 1970s’ conceptual artists in America and Europe. His practise was political in the sense that his subject matter was a critique of multinational corporations and advertising. Haacke made a number of installations consisting of text panels with photographs detailing the activities of multinational companies such as William Morris, often subverting advertising design used by the company. Haacke's earlier sculptural work includes a piece called Condensation Cube (1965), a Plexiglas cube about 50 cm square with naturally occurring and accumulating droplets of condensation inside it. 

!Alighiero Boetti.

The Italian artist Boetti made quite a lot of wall hangings using embroidery, chiefly maps of the world, but also tapestry panels showing the letters of the alphabet. His interests were naming, writing and maps. He often made work using embroidery and tapestry, as well as the equally time consuming method of using a ballpoint pen to colour large areas. Boetti made a series of drawings in ballpoint pen of invisible words. Reading from a key to the drawing along the top and sides, it is possible to discern words hidden in the drawings by referring to inverted commas on a grid. The whole paper is coloured by intensive use of the blue or red ballpoint, leaving only the inverted commas white. 

!On Kawara.

A Japanese artist who began working in the 1960s, Kawara is known for a number of conceptual projects and endurance works. I Met, I Went is a year of postcards written and mailed to friends and acquaintances by Kawara every day for a year. The work with which Kawara is usually associated is a constantly accumulating series called the Date Paintings, of which he has made one a day since the 1960s. Each identical 50 cm high painting has the day’s date painted in white numerals on a black canvas. 

!Michael Craig Martin.

Craig Martin is British American artist born in the 1940s who makes wall paintings depicting ordinary objects – furniture, paperclips, tools, bicycles, lamps, globes and fittings are juxtaposed without reference to relative scale at various angles. The objects are placed on very brightly coloured grounds painted with matt emulsion paint and outlined in black plastic tape, except for a period in the 1980s when Craig Martin used square sectioned steel rods bent to shape and welded to create the outlines. The wall paintings may fill a whole gallery or museum, or just one wall. Craig Martin’s earlier work made in the 1960s and 70s is conceptual. His best known work is the Oak Tree, which consists of a glass of water placed on a glass shelf above the viewer’s head and an accompanying framed text which explains to the viewer why the glass of water is an oak tree, by means of a question and answer between the artist and a fictitious interlocutor. The artist claims that it is by the authority invested in him as an artist that the glass of water is an oak tree, thus this is a work about authorship and subjectivity. He also made a work with a row of clipboards and plumb lines hung on a wall, a series of boxes with hinged lids placed on the floor, the lids taking progressively larger parts of the box until the lid was more box and the box was more lid. 

!Sol Le Witt.

An American conceptual artist who made installation and drawings, Le Witt is best known for his wall drawings made in pencil directly onto the wall which is painted either black or white. He devised complex geometric patterns of lines – parallel, radiating or on a grid – which are drawn in coloured pencil, forming a barely perceptible drawing which nevertheless has a strong effect on the space and adds glowing areas of colour. Le Witt also made a number of sculptures based on the grid. These are three dimensional grids formed from 30 cm cubes stacked in rows on the floor. the whole sprayed with white lacquer. Each layer has a different formation and may be up to 40 cubes long. The cubes are not solid, so that the structure has a complex appearance. 

!Daniel Buren.

Buren painted lozenge shapes on buildings and architectural structures, making site specific works that use the lozenge shapes as a visual intervention to prompt a reconsideration of the scene presented to the viewer, and attempt to alter the reading of the picture plane, treating an environment as if it were no more than a photograph. The lozenges allude to signage and logos are entirely without function. Buren's work is as much to do with reconsidering landscape painting as it is do with installation. 

!Victor Burgin.

An American artist who made conceptual work from the 1960s onwards with a strong theoretical slant which is evident both in the work and in his writing about art. 

!James Lee Byars.

One of Byars’s sculptures is a clear acrylic case, containing white sand, a white book, and a cream coloured (almost white) snake. This work can be recreated anywhere as long as the artist’s instructions are followed: he specifies the white sand, the dimensions of case and book, which must be made by a bookbinder, and that the snake must be as close to white as is available. Early conceptualism implied a form of resistance to subversion of the cultural norm. This gave the work of these artists a political edge until at the end of the twentieth century conceptualism became the norm. One artist who is identified with a subversive intention is Beuys, who made conceptual and political art between the 1950s and the 80s. 

!Joseph Beuys.

Born in early 1930s Beuys is one of the most significant German artists of the second half to the twentieth century. He was a professor at the Dusseldorf academy for many years, where he had a huge influence on several generations of younger artists. Beuys was an eccentric character who always dressed in the same canvas hat and black canvas shooting waistcoat with multiple pockets. He was extremely prolific, working in all media but chiefly known as a sculptor, performance and installation artist who proclaimed that ‘life is art’, thus making his every action a part of his work. Beuys is notorious for the myth of a near death experience that surrounds him and although long since discredited has proved impossible to ignore. It was said that he had been shot down when flying for the Luftwaffe in the second world war over snowy mountains. His life was saved by local villagers who found him and kept his body temperature up by smearing him in pig fat and wrapping him in felt. Whether apocryphal or not, this event would seem to have had a profound influence on most of Beuys’s work, given that his favoured materials are felt and fat. However, Beuys’s personal lexicon is often impenetrable and inaccessible. One of his best known works is Portrait of the Artist Talking to a Dead Hare, which was made for his first solo show in New York in 1979. Beuys sat in the gallery, his head covered in honey and gold leaf (also highly important symbolic substances in his work), cradling a dead hare in his arms and talking to it. As a declared socialist and an anti capitalist, politics are a major feature of Beuys’s work. He was sacked from his academic post at Dusseldorf for inciting student riots, although the exact truth is subject to speculation. In his second New York show he made a work with a live wolf, titled I Like America and America Likes Me. Beuys sat in the gallery behind a chain link fence separating him and the viewer, talking to the wolf for a week. The wolf symbolised the plundering and appropriation of the American wilderness and by his interaction with its spirit Beuys was trying to heal the wounds caused to the indigenous people. Beuys’s best known work is Fat Chair, a wooden chair with lard piled at a slant towards the back of it. He made a number of works from stacks of plate steel and felt which he described as batteries, a kind of life preserving power source. A number of vitrines containing an array of mysterious but apparently utilitarian metal, wood, fat and felt objects. A series of performances given by Beuys took the format of lectures often conducted in a studio, in which he used blackboards to illustrate a talk, usually about the possibility of art being life, and in particular to make his famous claim that ‘Art is a Social Sculpture’. By this he meant that art could not exist without the interaction of the viewer, it was therefore subjective, and thus a social event and by extension political. The blackboards with their drawings, diagrams and writings remain as a document of the lecture. Beuys made himself a felt suit and various other garments and items, which usually had a cross cut from cotton fabric stitched onto them. In 1985 Beuys installed rolls of felt the height of a London gallery all round the walls and across the entrance, leaving only a small three foot high gap from the floor up for the viewer to enter. Inside was a grand piano. A total damped silence was implied by felt and experienced by the deadened acoustic. Beuys also made a work consisting of a Volkswagen camper van with a number of wooden sledges emerging from its door, linked by a harness. Public works consisted of the planting of 5000 trees in a small town and the casting of a concrete public underpass by pouring melted lard into it and then cutting it out. Beuys made many works on paper, using charcoal, paint, ink and, in particular, a specific brand of rust coloured paint, the kind used to preserve sail cloth or paint door steps. The name of the paint and the colour was personally symbolic. In the first half of the century some artists were involved more directly in politics. 

!!ART AND POLITICS.

Artists have often used their skills in the service of their political beliefs, sometimes by working as official state artists, in which case they were well provided for. The Soviet government used socialist realist art as a propaganda tool and so artists who wanted to resist found other ways of working. Chinese state artists were similarly employed, some even worked at altering photographs to suit the government’s needs. Artists working under totalitarian regimes who had opposing political beliefs may have had no choice but to serve the state or risk punishment. In order to avoid this many defected or worked underground and in these situations art has often been a tool of resistance or subversion. Most of these artists did not achieve great fame due to the circumstances in which they had to live, but some did. Picasso’s Guernica is a well known work of political resistance. Some artists simply used their skills to record what they found abhorrent. 

!Kathe Kollwitz.

Kollwitz is an Austrian artist who made contemporaneous drawings in the concentration camps during the holocaust mainly in graphite and charcoal often depicting women. 

!Diego Rivera.

Rivera was a Mexican mural painter working in the 1930s and 40s who made political wall paintings celebrating ordinary people and workers in public buildings in the service of the socialists. He fell out of favour when the socialist government gave way to a right wing party who found him politically embarrassing and prevented him from finishing his last major public commission. Rivera was the husband of the artist Frida Kahlo and a friend of Leon Trotsky. The posters used by the demonstrators in the national strike and demonstrations in Paris and other cities in May 1968 borrowed the ideas of the Situationist International group of artists, who set up a poster printing workshop to make them. These bold graphic one colour screen prints had simple images and texts, for example ‘Under the pavement is the Beach’ and ‘Beauty is in the streets’. 

!!THE SITUATIONIST INTERNATIONAL.



!Guy Debord.

Founder of the Situationist International, a Paris based group of international artists, Debord led the group with his revolutionary ideas (and politics). Debord took Baudelaire's idea of the flaneur, the wanderer through a city, and developed it into his personal concept of the ‘dérive’, a directed walk through urban scenery. Debord believed that people should interact with their city, to which end he had various ideas including putting light switches on street lamps so that the people could turn them on and off at will. 

!Asger Jorn.

A Dutch artist and member of the Situationists, Jorn made collages with torn posters, for example a sixteenth century portrait of a woman in a blue brocade dress has her face defaced by the additions of paint and a collaged element. There was a strong performative element in what the Situationists proposed. Many artists in the 70s took conceptual objections to the status of the art object to its logical extreme and began to make performance art, dispensing with the object and any sense of permanence entirely, using their own bodies as both subject and material. Performance art was also a focus for many women artists who saw it as a way to make work about reclaiming of the female body by women. 

!!PERFORMANCE ART.



!Carolee Schneeman.

American artist Schneeman’s best known work is Meatjoy (1975), for which a large number of naked performers were instructed to perform an orgiastic celebration by wallowing in animal entrails and pieces of meat and blood. EyeBody was a solo work by Schneeman in which she sat on a swing, naked, in a space with white backdrop paper on the walls, holding an umbrella. During the performance she made a drawing by swinging as close as she could to the walls and drawing on them. For another work Interior Scroll, Schneeman read out loud a poem that she had written, from a long strip of paper previously inserted into her vagina and gradually extracted as she read. Schneeman’s Olympia, made in collaboration with sculptor Robert Morris, was a performance in which she posed as the woman in Manet's eponymous painting. Morris, dressed in a white robe and wearing leather work gloves, carried large plywood boards around, arranging them as a backdrop to Schneeman. Both performers wore white makeup. The piece was concerned with the ‘work’ of art, about the male artist and the female model, and about the translation from two to three dimensions, the boards representing ‘planes’. 

!Tseching Hsieh.

This Chinese artist made a performance in the early 1980s for which he was tied to another person by a rope 3 metres long for one year. 

!Allan Kaprow.

Kaprow is best known for his Happenings in New York in the late 1960s. These were site specific installations in which a performance would happen witnessed by an invited audience. The Happenings were one of the earliest examples of artists making live art in galleries or gallery like spaces rather than in a theatre or studio space. One Happening took place in a loft in which a structure of stud wall frames covered with transparent plastic sheeting created a box like space in which the performers could be seen but were obscured. Kaprow wrote a seminal book about the Happenings which was influential for artists making time based work. 

!Eleanor Antin.

Antin is an American artist best known for her work Carving: a Traditional Sculpture made in 1971, for which she put herself on a strict diet and had a male doctor weigh and measure her every day for a month. This is one of a number of works in which Antin investigated the effect of the ideals forced upon women in a patriarchal society. In this work she attempted to literally sculpt her own body, making a comment both on women’s control over their own bodies, on the centuries of depiction of the nude female body by men, and on women’s continuing need to make themselves attractive for men. The performance was documented by one photograph every day that were then placed together in a grid and framed, and by a video. During the 1980s Antin began to make more theatrical performances, using cut out puppets. She also developed an alter ego, Eleanora Antinova, a trans gender Russian ballet dancer who appeared in a tutu and a long beard. 

!Marina Abramovic and Ulay.

Abramovic first came to public attention when she invited visitors to a gallery in which she appeared naked, stating that the visitors could do anything they wanted to her and she would not resist or retaliate. She provided a number of implements with which to do this including knives and a gun. Abramovic narrowly avoided serious injury but discovered that her initial premise was correct: like the invisible barrier of etiquette surrounding an artwork, there was a barrier of propriety and embarrassment protecting her that was only broached when the beginnings of a mob mentality formed. Abramovic worked together with her partner Ulay until the early 1980s making performance ‘sculptures’ and endurance works. A work entitled Breathe linked them in a mouth to mouth embrace for as long as they could breathe using their combined exhaled breath. They braided their hair together and stayed sitting back to back for eight hours. For another work they used a full size bow and arrow and stood facing each other, with Ulay holding the string and Abramovic holding the arrow at the point on the centre of the bow string from which it is released. They maintained this state of equilibrium through tension until the strain of holding on meant they had to either stop or let go of the tension in the bow. This would have resulted in the release of the arrow, which was aimed at Abramovic. In Doorway they stood naked and facing each other on either side of the entrance to the gallery. This meant that those wishing to enter were forced to brush past them and had to choose who to face as they turned sideways to enter. These partner works focused on endurance through concentration and on the tension in partnerships manifested in physical mutual support. They are notable for the degree of politeness and gentleness combined with a power and implicit violence. The artists described them as sculptures. After the relationship with Ulay ended Abramovic continued to make endurance works. While these maintained a formal sculptural quality they also acquired a ritual aspect, as in the work in which she sat in a circle of salt surrounded by poisonous snakes. In another work created in an amethyst mining town in Brazil, she made and wore clogs from blocks of amethyst. Abramovic made a work for a tree sited in a public square in which she placed a number of speakers playing birdsongs so that it seemed that the tree was teeming with tiny birds. 

!Vito Acconci.

Acconci, an American artist, made several endurance works in the early 1970s, notably Seedbed, for which he built a false gallery floor which sloped up from the door to the rear of the space. Acconci was reputedly sealed in the void under the floor masturbating. In another work he constructed a shelf high up on the gallery wall in such a way that he could not be seen by those in the gallery from any angle and stayed on the shelf for the hours during which the gallery was open. In these works he made the gallery space and the viewer’s own feelings about being in that space into the subject of the work. A smaller scale work involved a video on a monitor placed on a furry rug on the floor. On the screen Acconci is seen, lying on his stomach, his face right up against the camera, talking to the viewer and inviting them to lie down on the rug and join him on the floor. 

!Chris Burden.

Burden became known in the late 1960s and early 70s for his performance work that mostly involved physical endurance. In ‘Shoot’ he arranged for a friend to shoot him in the arm in a gallery at a specified time in front of an audience. The shooting, which did not seriously injure Burden, was documented and like all his works of the period, the documentation became the work. In Locker Piece he had himself locked in a left luggage locker at a railway station for eight hours. In Freeway he lay in the middle of a freeway. He also had himself nailed to the bonnet of a Volkswagen Beetle through his hands and feet. Burden was interested in making formal sculptural work using his own body and in the visual power of pain and danger. The purity and simplicity of the works made them very powerful. In his later work he developed an interest in war and military capability through his pacifist beliefs and interest in ecology and the environment. He made a work involving hundreds of tiny model submarines, and a large meteorite like lump suspended from the gallery ceiling with model railway track running all over it and in and out of it. In 1999 Burden constructed a large and complex computer controlled machine for making and throwing paper aeroplanes. 

!Joan Jonas.

An American performance artist and musician who worked with Judson Church dancers Yvonne Rainer and Merce Cunningham, Jonas made a performance work in which she played the cello. 

!Dara Birnbaum.

Birnbaum is an American artist best known for her performance in which she dressed as Wonder Woman. Some women artists made work that although not performed was performative in its intention. They included Judy Chicago and Mary Kelly. 

!Judy Chicago.

American artist Chicago changed her name from the patronymic to that of her birthplace as a feminist gesture in the 1970s. Chicago’s work The Dinner Party from 1972 became an iconic feminist work. It is a narrow table arranged in a triangular format, with place settings for all the famous and unsung heroines of American life, for example Mrs Lincoln. The place settings are actually embroideries depicting plates, each one made by a different woman artist, similar to the way women make church kneelers. Chicago wanted to draw attention to the under representation of women’s achievement by staging this imaginary dinner party of these great women, using traditionally female but culturally undervalued materials and methods. She brought the women together by means of the dinner table because this is how women had traditionally brought people together. The work came to be seen as representative of the struggle for recognition of women from all areas of life and times, and was influential for several succeeding generations of artists. 

!Mary Kelly.

An American artist who made works dealing with feminist issues from the 1970s onwards. Kelly’s seminal work is the Post Partum Document, an extremely influential work made in 1973 documenting the birth and emergence into language of her son Kelly. The work takes the form of about thirty framed panels, each containing an object and a text. The object might be a soiled nappy (which helped to gather tabloid attention at the time), or an item of clothing. The text details the child’s weight and length, age in weeks, and describes his development with notes on his linguistic development. In this work Kelly documents not only the birth of her child but also her care for his life as a creative activity. This startlingly simple and obvious statement caused a great deal of criticism and publicity, and the Post Partum Document was declared not to be art, to be offensive and even cruel. Despite the criticism Kelly was widely acknowledged to have raised the issue of motherhood as a taboo, as work that is not to be considered work, not on a par with artistic achievement and not to be revealed in all its messy detail. The work’s form was important. It was predominantly a text work and this was another of Kelly’s points – that text, or language, is how the subject is constituted and that we are not subjects until we are speaking subjects. The emergence of a child into language is therefore the most important moment in our existence. Kelly drew on the works of Lacan, the French literary theorist who developed the theory of the other and the difference between the male and female subject, and of psychoanalytic writers such as Freud and Klein. Lacan's theories on the constitution of the subject were particularly influential for a whole generation of artists in the 1980s, mostly but not all of them women. Kelly’s later work developed into institutional critique and was always wall and text based. She made a work that consisted of highly crafted metal medallions or wall plaques. 

!Hannah Darboven.

Artist working in the 1960s and 70s who made works using text. Darboven was interested in catalogues, indexes and diaries, one work for example took hundreds of index cards on which the artist had written and displayed them carefully categorised. The text on the cards however consisted only of ‘x’s. This display of an organising system that contained no information served to visualise a practice which is in use in daily life, but which is never actually seen and rarely considered. Darboven’s obsessive writing projects are always made by hand. 

!Hannah Wilke.

American artist who became known in the 1970s for her photographic and performance work. Wilke often appeared naked, which was controversial at a time when feminist artists were reclaiming the female body, traditionally painted naked by men, for themselves. For one performance she appeared naked but wearing high heeled shoes on the steps of a public building. Wilke’s Chewing Gum Scarification Series is her best known work, in which she applied a large number of ‘scars’ made from chewed gum to her naked torso and photographed herself. These scars were also exhibited as sculptures. Wilke made a video work which shows her in her apartment, mostly on the phone to a man with whom it seems evident she is flirting. The film is a study in body language and how the viewer interprets it. 

!Martha Rosler.

American artist who began her career in the seventies making a number of photographic and text based works which juxtapose text and image to make work that highlights social inequity and challenges assumptions. She is best known for her seminal work the Bowery Project. This consists of a series of photographs paired with texts that juxtapose words or phrases used to describe people who live on the streets with images of the area in which they live. An image of a banking hall doorway, for example, is paired with the phrase ‘down and out’. An early collaborative work called Metal Box Factory is a systematic survey of a number of employees in a factory around 1970. Rosler asked the workers to write down their daily schedules both at work and home, displayed the results and made a comparison of the time spent working and at home. The schedules reveal the amount of work done in the home mostly by the women to be almost as much as the work done in the factory. Clocking on cards and production line rotas are also part of the display of material in the installation. Rosler made a series of collages showing domestic interiors that are (often humorous) comments on the division of labour in the home and the role of the housewife. Rosler is one to the earliest artists to make politicised feminist work which presented a critique of society. Performance art often combined video and installation. Some artists like Bruce Nauman had a multi disciplinary practice. 

!Bruce Nauman.

Nauman is an American artist who began his career in the 1960s making performance, installation, sculpture and video work. In fact Nauman made some of the earliest video art, in the days when the technology was new and only television broadcast equipment was available. This was bulky and heavy, and editing equipment was not readily available. Nauman was also one of the first artists to consider the television monitor as an art object in itself, as seen in his corridor installation. This consists of two 4 metre high freestanding white walls, placed next to each other with a gap in between. The walls are at a slight angle so that the gap between them narrows gradually until it is the width of a monitor, which shows only white interference. As the viewer approaches the work from the wider end, the light from the monitor creates a hypnotic effect so that the viewers feel compelled to enter the corridor and walk as far as they can before they no longer fit the space. This is intended to represent the tunnel with a white light at the end that is often described by those who have had a near death experience. In the 1960s and 70s, Nauman made several performed works that are usually viewed as video documents. The most well known is Taking a Line for a Walk, in which Nauman is seen walking around a square marked on the floor. Another work, a development of this piece, is a 4 metre high white box round which the viewer can walk. A closed circuit television monitor is placed at each corner, on which the viewer sees himself or herself passing the previous monitor. The film playing on the monitor is played back at slight delay, so that the viewers are following themselves. At the same time, since they are walking around a square, the implication is that they ought to be able to catch up with themselves. Nauman made other video works, one for example in which he is dressed as a clown and laughs uncontrollably for thirty minutes. The way the video is presented is always important; in this the monitor is in a wooden cubicle. In the 1980s Nauman began to make more static sculptural work, and began a series in which he cast dogs in rubber and displayed them in various ways, for example hanging them from the ceiling in a carousel like structure. In the 1990s Nauman made a large scale video installation for which he filmed himself, head and shoulders, talking to himself, and presented a number of these films on 2 metre high flat screen monitors placed upside down. Cinema and the work of experimental filmmakers had a great influence on many artists and with the advent of early video technology the distinction between art and film became blurred. 

!Nam June Paik.

This American artist was one of the first to make and show video as a sculpture. Paik was also the first artist to broadcast his work on national television, which he did by purchasing advertising slots. The work most often associated with him is a robot made from television monitors. 

!William Wegman.

Wegman is an American artist who made a number of videos in the 1970s featuring himself and his pet dog, a Weimaraner named Fay Wray. The dog performs a number of actions, such as licking up a line drawn in milk on the studio floor, which Wegman himself also tries to do, considerably less efficiently. Two similar dogs sit face on to the camera following something off screen intently in perfect unison, the object of the dogs’ attention moving sometimes slowly and sometimes dramatically and violently. The videos are filmed in black and white in a single shot with no editing. Wegman went on to make colour photographs of the dog dressed in clothes. 

!!EXPERIMENTAL FILM.



!Kenneth Anger.

An underground filmmaker born in the 1950s whose best known film Scorpio Rising had an influence on a whole generation of artists and filmmakers. A number of artists made site specific work that, like performance art, relied on photographic documentation for its dissemination and permanence. This became known as land art. 

!!LAND ART.



!Dennis Oppenheim.

Much of Oppenheim's work was site specific land art with a performative endurance element. For one of Oppenheim’s best known works, Trench, he suspended his outstretched body by pressing with his hands and feet against the top of two opposite walls of a purpose built trench. For another he lay in the sun until his skin was burnt and had changed colour, calling his sunburn the evidence that an artwork had been made. 

!Robert Smithson.

Smithson's work is nearly always site specific and involves him altering the natural environment, either by rearranging it or by placing mirrors so that the landscape reflects itself. He is interested in the perspective of the map in terms of making the ground his work surface or picture plane, and in creating ‘images’ which, like the topography represented by a map, are only visible from the air. In one sense, then, his work is intentionally invisible. Smithson’s use of mirrors is a development of this interest in making formal rearrangements of the natural world. The mirror works occupied a variety of locations, including rural ones and one in Manhattan in which large mirrors are stood on the ground at specific angles. Spiral Jetty is the best known work by any land artist. It was made by taking several tonnes of small rock to a salt lake and building a walkway, which leaves the beach and follows a very large spiral that is only visible form the air. Spiral Jetty has over the years been submerged by the lake and now ceases to exist. However, it was documented in photographs and on film, like all of Smithson’s work, and this is the form in which his work is most commonly experienced. In fact Smithson was very interested in the dichotomy between the reality of his work experienced in situ and in a photograph (which shows the work in an entirely different way). He made a number of other earthworks and plans for earthworks, and also made work using maps. 

!Mary Miss.

American artist born in the late 1940s who made a number of earthwork sculptures, for example a cube shaped void sunk into the ground which had its top exactly level with the surface, and could be entered on ramps from ground level. Miss subverted minimal sculptural forms being made by her contemporaries by making them absolutely concrete but invisible. 

!Agnes Denes.

The American artist Denes planted and cultivated a field of wheat in Manhattan on a two acre landfill site in 1982. Denes wanted to make a work about world trade, the economics of food production and famine. 

!Walter De Maria.

Known for his permanent installation Lightning Field of 1987 which is a site in Arizona, in a specific area that has the highest frequency of lightning strikes in the world. De Maria set out a square mile of lightning conductor poles linked by conductive wires which when struck by lightening animate the field in a spectacle of blue light and electrical activity. 

!!SITE SPECIFIC ART.



!Gordon Matta Clark.

American artist Matta Clark is best known for his work House, a suburban clapboard house that the artist cut in two vertically down the centre. The two halves lean outwards and away from each other. Matta Clark made a number of other works which involved cutting through buildings, for example a project at the opening of the Pompidou Centre in Paris in which he cut several circular and elliptical holes through a nearby building that was about to be redeveloped. Although major in terms of their execution, Matta Clark’s interventions are visually extremely simple. 

!Christo and Jeanne Claude.

Beginning in the 1970s French artist Christo and his partner Jeanne Claude began wrapping objects, to transform one thing into another, solidify forms, change a hard form to an apparently soft one, graduating to larger and larger objects. They began to work with fabric on a large scale, either wrapping buildings or the landscape. They used parachute silk, vinyl and other kinds of industrial fabric with the required properties. Several works exemplify what they do best. For example, Valley Curtain, made in the early 1980s, was a large orange curtain hung across a valley somewhere in California. Running Fence is a mile long fence of red fabric that follows the contours of a hill. The artists installed a large number of table umbrellas dotted over a hillside. The Island Skirts surround a number of small islands, following the shoreline and floating on the water for thirty metres or so. As with all their work, the proportions of the intervention always take the view from a distance into account. The work is by its nature temporary and is always made with the final photographic document in mind. Thus the island skirts were designed to be wide enough to be clearly visible in an aerial photograph, and the locations are very carefully chosen with the final photograph in mind. In the 1990s Christo and Jeanne Claude completed their most ambitious projects, the Wrapped Reichstag and the Wrapped Pont Neuf. These structures were wrapped in a fabric that was light enough to fold and gather around the forms they covered, and bound with rope. The Pont Neuf was wrapped in a gold fabric resulting in a transformation that was a triumph of planning, negotiation and construction. There are still postcards of the work on every Parisian postcard rack. 

!!FIGURATIVE PAINTING.

In Britain in the early twentieth century many figurative painters were engaged in a gritty realism that echoed the post war reality. 

!Stanley Spencer.

British artist Spencer painted English rural life and religious subjects, often combining the two. He often showed god or Jesus in a scene set in an English village. The paintings are sometimes large and the composition is crowded. Spencer’s figures are often solidly built with heavy limbs, almost statue like, and he kept to a palette of grey, brown and ochre. 

!Ivon Hitchens.

Hitchens’s English landscapes with vegetation and flowers are painted with loose flowing brushstrokes leaving parts of the canvas unpainted. He favoured subdued earth colours, purples, blues and greens. 

!John Bratby.

Bratby was one of a group known as the kitchen sink painters for their choice of domestic subject matter. Bratby's interiors showed his own home and family, painted with thickly encrusted paint often squeezed directly from the tube and applied with a palette knife, in an almost naïve style. 

!Cecil Collins.

British twentieth century visionary painter. 

!LS Lowry.

British artist Lowry lived and worked in the North of England and painted scenes of everyday and working class life in the cities of the North. He became known as a kind of people’s painter, a painter of ‘matchstick men and matchstick cats and dogs’ immortalised in a popular music song. Lowry’s paintings showed the grey light of northern winters and the relentless coming and going of daily life, with buildings and a multitude of tiny people walking past. The people are painted in two or three brushstrokes, suggestions of figures so that Lowry could paint a great number of them on one painting. The paintings are often predominantly grey or white, the figures in dark colours with little hints of brighter colours. 

!Lucian Freud.

A British figurative painter who was born in the 1930s, Freud began his career precociously in his teens and was still painting in 2003. He paints portraits, usually of models, sometimes of friends, family, and sometimes of well known people, although he rarely accepts commissions. His models are almost always nude, or semi clothed and painted in accurate detail, but with a psychological perspective. They are often lying down. The predominant colours of the paintings are consistent: skin tones, and the greys and browns of his studio are the background to all his works since he never paints anywhere else. A painting may take up to twenty or so sittings, and some sitters are not able to continue. He has often painted a favourite model repeatedly. Some of Freud’s paintings might be of two people lying together, or there may be a dog, often a greyhound. He favours gaunt loose skinned physiques but has also painted larger people. Freud’s subjects include himself, his lovers, his models (sometimes the two are the same), his daughters, artist Leigh Bowery, the Queen of England and the fashion model Kate Moss. 

!Francis Bacon.

Bacon was a very important British painter whose paintings are conceptual but theatrical figurative works with abstract qualities. They are nearly always portraits in which the figure is distorted, often to grotesque effect, perhaps looking as if they have been melted or brushed away, appearing to be in discomfort. The figures are rendered with rough brushstrokes, and are placed on a contrasting flat colour background, often within a delineated three dimensional space. Bacon made many self portraits. One of his best known works is the diptych Three Screaming Popes; three large canvases each with a portrait of a pope in a cope and mitre, within a kind of abstract geometric frame structure, on dark orange and red grounds. The faces of the popes are blurred and distorted. He also painted a dog that is either curled up or chasing its tail. As with Bacon’s other work, there is an impression of movement, as if a photograph has been taken on a long exposure and the sitter moved, leaving a trail of the movement on the image. Bacon was almost as well known for his lifestyle as for his work. A heavy drinking habitué of bars in Soho in London he lived a solitary and obsessive working life, rarely spending a day without painting. His studio was famously untidy and dirty. Bacon died in the 1990s. Painting had begun to aspire to the condition of photography, particularly in America. This was to become a major theme in the work of Richter and others later on, but initially there were only a few interested artists. Photorealist painters literally mimicked the appearance of a photograph. 

!Chuck Close.

Close initially made photo realist paintings but he is best known for his gridded paintings which, although they pre date digital technology, have the appearance of pixilated images. Inspired by the printing process and the way an image is broken down into dots of three colours, Close developed a way of placing a grid of squares of about 3 by 3 cm over the image he wanted to paint, very often a self portrait. He then produced the image by painting each square a different colour so that from a distance the image would be readable but close up the coloured squares would be predominate. In doing so he was investigating both the effect of photographic printing and painting, making a painting that looked photographic, as painting had been trying to do, yet not in the conventional sense. All this work was made before the digital revolution that has made Close’s paintings look exactly like pixels. As well as paintings, Close also made works on paper in watercolours. He made a series of self portraits using black and greys that emulate black and white photos. 

!Reinhardt Voight.

An American artist born around 1950, Voight makes paintings based on a grid. In Voight’s early work he translated a photographic image into a coloured grid, degrading the image almost entirely, an idea that prefigured pixellation by decades. 

!David Hockney.

One of the best known of all British twentieth century artists, Hockney was born in the 1940s and began his career in the 1960s, becoming successful while he was still at college. At this early stage he often added text to his paintings as in a work titled We Two Boys Together Swinging, where he added the title of the painting in white letters. Hockney’s most famous painting is called The Bigger Splash. It shows an empty swimming pool and diving board with a villa in the background. The pool is rendered in flat aquamarine and there is a white splash in the water as if someone had just dived in. This is the best known representation of a splash in the history of painting. Hockney went to live in Los Angeles and the swimming pool became his favourite subject. He became very good at painting water and also painted in watercolour on tiled sheets of watercolour paper. He continued to paint in watercolour in 2003, making large scale full length portraits. Drawings constitute a major part of Hockney’s oeuvre. He used a single confident line, pencil or pen, and also made a number of lithographs and etchings. His drawings are restrained and monochrome in comparison to his often bright paintings. He drew his friends and lovers incessantly, and his mother, as well as still lifes, flowers, landscapes and animals, in particular cats and dogs. In fact Hockney’s work is extremely traditional in terms of his subject matter, it was rather his means of execution that attracted attention. Another well known painting by Hockney is Mrs and Mrs Clarke at Home, a double portrait of Ossie and Celia Clarke, fashion designer friends of Hockney’s, seated on opposite sides of a bay window in their London home with their cat next to them. Hockney also designed a number of stage productions for opera companies, notably the Magic Flute and The Rake’s Progress, painting backdrops as well as designing costumes. 

!Edward Hopper.

An American artist who began his career in the 1940s, Hopper is one of the most popular painters of American life, mostly but not always choosing urban scenes. He was particularly good at painting night scenes. One painting shows a bar at night, a long and low corner building, green on the outside with mostly black on the canvas, but glowing with bright yellow light from its interior. Inside is a woman waitress and a few solitary male customers. Another painting shows a petrol station at night, another a person on a lonely road at by a payphone, caught in the headlights of an oncoming car. Hopper depicted the melancholy and loneliness that he found in modern life. 

!Norman Rockwell.

American artist who made paintings that represented the American way of life, and who became synonymous with a certain idealised view of America. Rockwell painted rural scenes depicting life on farmsteads, domestic interiors, fireside scenes and landscapes. A particularly well known work is a painting of a meadow filled with poppies in which a little girl is sitting. Rockwell painted in a highly realistic illustrative style avoiding any reference to painting as object. He spent his career making an impeccably painted record of America between the 1940s and 60s, many of which were printed on the cover of Picture Post and became images that entered into the national consciousness. 

!Georgia O’Keefe.

O’Keefe is well known for her paintings of hugely enlarged flowers in very strong colours which also allude to the female anatomy. O’Keefe spent many years living in the desert in New Mexico from which she derived much of her inspiration, also making a series of works depicting bleached animal bones and skulls which she found there. Through her flower paintings O’Keefe succeeded in turning a traditionally delicate subject into large bold and even aggressive or threatening forms. 

!Frida Kahlo.

This Mexican artist was born in the 1920s and made figurative paintings, largely self portraits. Kahlo depicted the tragedy of her life in her paintings, which are graphic and detailed. She shows herself in many guises, with her distinguishing eyebrows that meet in the middle, and her long braided hair and native Mexican dress. She details her gynaecological problems and back problems stemming from a trolley bus accident as a young girl (which eventually took her life prematurely in the 1950s) in her paintings, in particular a number of miscarriages (she shows the foetus outside her womb, still attached by the umbilical cord, for example) and the restraining corset which she wore to support her spine in her last years. Kahlo's discomfort and anger at her body’s inability to fulfil its biological destiny, coupled with a feminist fury at the obstacles faced by a woman trying to succeed as a serious painter at that time, also fed into her work. Kahlo’s paintings are disturbing and often horrific but also full of bright colours and pattern. Kahlo lived with the Mexican muralist Diego Rivera for part of her life. 

!Philip Guston.

American Guston made abstract expressionist work at the beginning of his career in the 1950s and early 60s. He then had a crisis of belief in abstraction and began to paint figuratively. Guston developed a distinctive personal iconography that included cigarette butts, ashtrays, horseshoes, shoes, and Klu Klux Klansmen’s pointed hats, painted in a cartoon like style with heavy black outlines. The objects in particular can be seen as self portraits. Paintings include a pile of shoes, old and battered boots with the odd horseshoe, an ashtray overflowing with giant, very fat cigarette butts, and a series of paintings of figures wearing Klansmen’s hats in which the figures are often facing each other as if trying to converse. Guston typically used either a monochrome palette of grey, brown, black and white (for example in the painting of a pile of horseshoes), or a bright palette. His bright colours are blue, red and a fairly bright light pink, the pink often used as a background. Some of the Klansmen paintings are black on white. Guston depicts a lonely world, yet not without a bleak humour, spending long hours in the studio smoking and trying to communicate with the rest of the world. 

!Sam Fernandez.

American artist Fernandez made psychedelic paintings in the 1960s and 70s, which were sometimes used for record covers. They consist of a richly dense backgrounds of patterns and flowers flowing into the main element of the image. Fernandez’s work influenced graphic design and was re discovered in the 1990s by a new generation of artists. 

!Nancy Spero.

Spero’s narrative paintings include small figures. She also made a work called A Tribute to Anna Mendieta (the wife of artist Carl Andre who died when she fell from the 30th floor of a building, reputedly pushed by Andre). This work is a pair of red handprints at the top of the gallery wall, which are dragged in a red smear down the wall as if someone with bloody hands was trying to hold on. 

!Helmut Newton.

Although not a painter, German photographer Newton was very influential among artists. He made black and white or occasionally coloured photographs of women, naked or clothed, but always objectified as glamorous, made up and fashionable. Newton always photographed his models wearing very high heels. Newton’s images fell out of favour for a time in the 1970s when feminist critics claimed back the female form, but he continued to make work. Newton’s women often seemed like objects for male pleasure but in fact they have a strange autonomy, despite their nakedness. Sometimes several women might be photographed together as in a well known image of several models standing in a group staring at the camera. 

!!EARLY TWENTIETH CENTURY SCULPTURE.



!Henry Moore.

Moore, a British artist born at the beginning of the twentieth century, began as a figurative sculptor, but later became a pioneer of semi abstract sculptural form in Britain, and made many public commissions. Like his peer Barbara Hepworth, Moore’s sculptures often have holes through them and hollows; he too was interested in representing the ‘void’ sculpturally. He worked in stone, bronze and clay. Unlike his contemporaries, however, Moore did not make smooth surfaced works; his roughly modelled sculptures are like giant bones, and always refer clearly to the human form. For example a reclining nude (a favourite form for Moore) might be abstracted from a series of voids and hollows, as if it were a piece of driftwood that had been worn away. A standing figure might have a large space where the belly would have been. Heads are featureless and the proportions of the body adjusted to suit the form that Moore was trying to achieve. Moore’s sculptures are often sited in rural landscapes and parks, and indeed it was the way in which the human form could be made to look as if it were part of the landscape that interested Moore. A late example of this is an arch (around 1960) made for a lakeside site in Hyde Park in London which seems to be constructed of three monumental bones, two standing on their ends, the other balancing across the two. Moore made a large number of drawings, both as preparatory sketches and in their own right. His drawings are realistic and anatomically accurate, as shown in a series of studies of hands. As well as drawing the figure, he made a series of impressions of people sheltering from bombs in an underground station during World War Two. 

!Jacob Epstein.

A British sculptor whose best known work is Rock Drill, the head and torso of a futuristic automaton like creature with a head shaped like an animal skull. The breastplate ribcage is carved with angular geometric lines and the head is turned to one side. Some of Epstein’s work reflects the agony of war. Epstein worked mostly in stone although he did make some bronze casts. Jacob and the Angel is a massive male and female figure both with huge thick limbs embracing each other. It is carved from a tan coloured but translucent stone. Epstein made a similar carving of a prone figure, a little like an Egyptian mummy. 

!Elisabeth Frink.

British artist born in the 1930s who has made bronze heads, busts and equestrian statues from the 1960s onwards. Frink is particularly known for her distinctive thin figures riding horses bareback whose tiny heads have strangely flat features. The surface of the sculptures is usually roughly modelled. Frink’s work can be seen in many public sites in London. 

!Niki De St Phalle.

French artist who makes large and small (ranging from table sized to outdoor public sculptures) papier mâché and fibreglass sculptures of human and animal forms. These are somewhat like totem poles or other tribal art objects, being mainly highly stylised white smoothed forms that are richly decorated with hand painted patterns particularly on the head and limbs. 

!Louise Bourgeois.

Bourgeois is an American sculptor born in the 1920s. She has had one of the longest careers of any female artists of her generation. Bourgeois has made works that are both intimate and monumental in scale, and all her work has a strong female sensibility. She has made, carved and cast sculpture and installations. Notable are her carved marble works of the 1950s and 60s, they are often quite small organic curvy shapes suggestive of the inside of the body or of plant growth. One of these is made in pink marble set on a plinth. Installations include room structures that have furniture and objects in them. Most recently she has made a monumental 30 metre high bronze spider. Bourgeois repeatedly uses the same motifs such as the shoe and the spider. 

!Barry Flanagan.

A British sculptor who mainly made semi abstract stone sculptures until the 1980s when he began to make figurative work and took the hare as his motif. Flanagan achieved great success with a series of sculptures featuring the figure of a leaping hare roughly modelled in clay, its legs exaggerated in length, cast in bronze, often painted in ultramarine, set upon a plinth made of a crisscrossed rectangle of lengths of planed wood. This hare and plinth combination was repeated in many different materials. 

!Ed Keinholz.

Keinholz created several installations including the Beanery, a tiny kiosk set up as a bar that the viewer could enter to experience the disorienting scale of the space inside it. Keinholz's installations usually featured life size figures cast from plaster, unpainted with real furniture, fittings and fabric. 

!Duane Hanson.

An American artist who began making his very well known life casts of people in the 1970s. Hanson’s fibreglass casts of himself and others are the sculptural equivalent of photo realist paintings. The casts are painted, have real hair added and are dressed to look as if they are real, prompting a double take by the viewer. Hanson chose very ordinary subjects, for example a police officer, a museum attendant, a pair of overweight and badly dressed American tourists, a motorbike accident victim prostrate with his bike, and a cleaning woman. 

!Allen Jones.

Jones is a British artist who achieved notoriety in the 1960s and 70s for his sculptures of women as furniture. Feminists in particular found his work hard to accept and although his work declined in popularity during the 1980s the images of some of his sculptures are known all over the world. Jones’s sculptures are made by modelling idealised life size female figures. These are cast in fibreglass, spray painted realistically and dressed in clothes, usually underwear. A characteristic work is a coffee table – a glass top is placed on the back of a kneeling woman who is wearing a basque, stockings and suspenders and extremely high heels. Other furniture includes a similar table top placed on the shins of a woman lying on her back with her legs bent at hip and knee, shins parallel to the floor and bound with cords to form a ‘z’ shaped support and a stool (a woman crouched over and bound with a specially made upholstered leather seat strapped on to her back, for example). Jones also made paintings. 

!Daniel Spoerri.

Italian sculptor who was part of the Arte Povera movement in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Spoerri is best known for his upside down table wall piece, a table top strewn with the remains of a meal – wine glass with dregs, dirty plate and brimming ashtray all fixed to the table and defying gravity. 

!Joseph Cornell.

An American artist known for making work in boxes. Cornell’s boxes vary in size and materials, they sometimes have doors, or interior shelves or sections, are often painted, covered in fabric or leather, and contain found items and printed material. They are like three dimensional collages. Abstract sculptors found a wide range of new materials and working methods, expanding the definition of sculpture. 

!Lynda Benglis.

An American sculptor working in the 1970s, Benglis made sculptures from brightly coloured polyurethane foam, poured onto the floor and allowed to expand and cohere. 

!Lee Bonteco.

Bontecou’s wall based constructions made from metal, acrylic sheet, perspex and rivets have the appearance of flowers but due to their materials they also reference aircraft fuselages. 

!Eva Hesse.

Hesse was born in the 1940s and died in 1969 but her prodigious output is now seen as an important counterpoint to the new and radical minimal sculpture being made at the time, and as also as a turning point for women artists who were in the minority, particularly in this field. Hesse combined current sculptural preoccupations with unorthodox and traditionally feminine materials and methods. Her achievement was recognised very early and she was included in several seminal exhibitions including one curated by Lucy Lippard, defining the new work. Hesse began her career around 1960 as a painter, training under Joseph Albers. She made figurative paintings and self portraits, gradually turning to abstraction, until she had a crisis of confidence in her ability to paint. Hesse ceased to make work until she and her husband travelled to Dusseldorf where a German industrialist collector had offered them a studio residency in a disused factory that he owned. There she found an abundance of materials and machine parts lying around, and she began to draw these parts and experiment. Working in the factory Hesse produced a number of odd abstract drawings based on the machine parts. She began to make wall based three dimensional paintings, modelling the surface of the work and adding string following the shapes, as well as projecting elements, the whole of which she painted. Then she went on to make sculptures with the materials she found on the factory floor. Her first successful ones were cubes of steel mesh sheets, open on one side. Hesse pushed equal lengths of rubber tubing through the holes in the mesh in the manner of rug tufting, to create a furry effect on the interior of the box. This painstaking task produced two sculptures (one with black tubing, one with transparent tubing), which combined the (traditionally female) techniques of handicraft with those (traditionally male) of industrial fabrication used to make minimal sculpture. Hesse continued to make wall reliefs from modelling materials, string and paint including Rosy, a breast like form on a buff coloured round with a spiral of string painted in graduated shades from pink to red. Hesse’s interest in concentric circles was worked in these reliefs and in her Dot graph paper drawings, delicate pencil or pen drawings in which rectangles are filled with row of tiny small circles or rows of concentric circles coloured in with pencil. The string forms resulted in a wall work consisting of a row of about 25 hemispheres 30 cm in diameter covered with string spiralling round, placed in a horizontal line on a long strip about 40 cm wide, at picture height on the wall. From the centre of each hemisphere, cords project and extend to the floor where the ends lie. The whole piece is painted grey. Hang up (1967) is a seminal work by Hesse consisting of a two metre by one and a half metre empty frame on the wall, bound with cloth bandage and painted light grey. A heavy gauge wire loop projects outwards from the frame that is also wrapped with cloth bandage. The loop is attached on the bottom right and top left corners and looping out about two metres from the wall and back again. The viewer may stand inside the loop, in which case they seem to be lassoed by the work. This work is an abstract but concrete representation of the nature of looking at paintings. String was one of Hesse's favoured materials along with latex and fibreglass. She made a string mesh consisting of lengths of cord dipped in latex and strung from the ceiling to form an abject enlarged untidy web. She took net shopping bags and stuffed them with scrunched up plastic sheeting, hanging them in clusters, which are strangely anthropomorphic, on the wall. She photographed herself lying on a bed covered with a mass of string like spaghetti. Hesse also used rubber tubing that she filled with plaster to create sausage like forms. Her work often made allusions to the male and the female body. The preoccupation with tubular forms and repetition characterises Hesse’s later works, Accession and Accretion. Accession consists of two 50 cm square black panels mounted on the wall with a space between them filled with a mass of silver wires. Accretion is a row of one and a half m long fibreglass tubes, slightly crumpled, leaning against the wall placed at regular intervals. Similar works are a casual arrangement of caved in fibreglass cylinders about 70 cm high and 50 cm wide standing on their ends on the floor, and rows of latex spheres on a sheet. 

!Dan Flavin.

An American artist working in the 1970s and 80s, Flavin used fluorescent tubes and the coloured light they produce as his medium. He created sculptures by leaning the tubes against the wall, sometimes two or three, sometimes a whole row, sometimes placed casually at different angles, sometimes measured and at the same angle. Some tubes might be placed flat on the floor. The transformers and cables are very visible and are part of the work. Example of works are a cruciform formation of cold blue coloured tubes mounted on the wall and three tubes, one red, one blue and one green. 

!Maya Lin.

Lin, an American artist, was chosen by competition to design the Vietnam War memorial in Washington. She designed a long highly polished black marble wall, inscribed on which in columns are the names of all those who lost their lives in combat in the Vietnam War. The wall is recessed at ground level, and appears to be gradually revealed as the ground in front of it is excavated to slope down. The top of the wall remains level parallel with the ground and viewers descend passing along the wall, which becomes higher in relation to them the further along the wall they walk. The memorial is extremely popular, due to its simple formal qualities and its gentle interactivity with the viewer. The memorial invites participation and takes the viewer down below ground level to see the names symbolically buried but rising up to meet the light. Its surface reflects the viewers, so that a multitude of faces appear on its surface. The traditional methods of casting and carving continued to be popular, but many sculptors now began to use welded steel. 

!Ellsworth Kelly.

An American sculptor who is best known for his 1960s to 80s work that consists of wall mounted steel shapes, distorted rhomboids, parallelograms and triangles. They are immaculately spray painted in matt primary colours and black and white, and butted up together one colour and shape against another, to create abstract works that are both sculpture and painting and have a contemplative lyrical presence. 

!Michael Kenny.

British artist Kenny made wood and metal abstract sculpture. 

!David Smith.

British artist working from the 1960s onwards who made large welded steel sculptures. 

!Philip King.

King is a British artist who made large steel sculptures between the 1960s and 80s. King made a number of public commissions, many of which can still be seen, for example in Fulham in London there is a red painted tubular steel structure work. King also made the designs for the decoration of the walls of Embankment underground station in London. 

!Hubert Dalwood.

A British sculptor born in early 1930s who died in the 1970s, Dalwood made carved, cast and constructed sculptures from stone, bronze, acrylic resin, acrylic sheet and metal. He also made a few paintings. His early works were totemic stone objects and tabletop sculptures that were a bit like small abstract sculpture gardens, cast in aluminium or bronze. He used tubular or square forms and wavy lines placed on a rectangular base that were cast in one piece and also made sculptures from acrylic with metal wire threaded through. As he became successful Dalwood began to be commissioned and he made a number of public works. One example is a construction in a park made from brushed steel tubes of a large diameter fixed vertically to the ground in a cluster, reaching about 5 metres in height, curving around at the top like giant geometric plant stalks. Another is an egg shaped bronze sculpture about one and a half metres in length lying on its side with some detail on its surface. 

!Alexander Calder.

British sculptor working in the 1940s to 60s who became best known for his kinetic sculpture and mobiles, Calder is one of the very few artists to have used the mobile successfully as a form in sculpture. Calder’s sculptures generally use circles, spheres and triangular shapes and rods. They are made in sheet metal, painted typically in black and white with red, yellow and blue. 

!Antony Caro.

Caro is a British artist who became very well known in the 1960s for his welded steel sculptures. Caro was the most successful of a group of British artists who made large scale abstract steel sculptures in the 1960s and early 1970s. His were either cut from steel plate, or made of round and square cross section steel tubes, rods and I beams which were sometimes left to rust, but sometimes spray painted in primary colours. Caro was one of the first sculptors to make semi abstract works on such a large scale. Caro was influenced by the scale of ambition of his American contemporaries but his subject matter was initially the English landscape; his sculptures depict landscapes, although they appear abstract. Caro used steel to make very open structures, often rather long and low, about 12 metres long and 2 metres high describing a kind of vista in space. One might be painted bright green, another bright yellow. Smaller works might be made from shapes cut from sheet steel put together in which the ragged edge from the cutting tool is often left unfinished. In the 1990s Caro made a number of small steel sculptures of a chair based on the chair in Van Gogh's painting of his own bedroom. Caro had been synonymous with a style of sculpture that was predominant in Britain for a decade, not least due to his years of teaching at St Martins School of Art in London, then a leading sculpture school. 

!Lynn Chadwick.

Chadwick's figurative bronzes range from life size to very small, around 30 cm high, human figures. They are angular, with stick like legs, flattened irregular trapezoid bodies, and heads that are either pyramid or cube shaped to denote female and male figures. Chadwick was interested in the difference between male and female forms in terms of body language. The bronzes mostly have a blue green coppery patina. 

!John Chamberlain.

Working in the 1960s American artist Chamberlain made sculptures from compressed dumped cars that he either retrieved from the compressing press or took to be compressed. The resulting cubes were exhibited as sculpture. He sometimes extracted compressed parts of cars that he combined to make into sculptures. 

!Eduardo Chillida.

Mexican artist Chillida is a sculptor who made monumental steel sculptures which were usually site specific, often situated in natural environments. For example, one of his characteristic M or comb like structures is placed on a cliff top to rust and acquire its orange red colour. During the 1980s, artists began to have a far greater variety of media at their disposal. Home video made it possible for anyone to shoot and edit films and large colour photographic prints were affordable. Digital technology was in its infancy but desk top publishing, graphics programmes and digital printing began to make an impact on artist's practise. 

!!POSTMODERNISM.

In the 1970s modernism had reached an impasse. The art object was no longer considered to have an autonomous existence; its meaning was constructed by the subjective interaction of the viewer. The work of Walter Benjamin on the aura of art, of Jean Baudrillard, Frederic Jamieson and Roland Barthes on art, culture and the nature of reality and Ferdinand de Saussure on semiotics were influential. All cultural forms were re examined and language was subjected to a rigorous philosophical analysis by structuralism writers and psychoanalytic theorists. Feminist theorists argued for an entire redefinition of subjectivity on psychoanalytical and semiotic grounds, influenced by the work of Jacques Lacan. Conceptual artists had been making work that examined the condition of art and the status of the art object, and soon artists working in all media began to follow suit. The 1980s was the era of conceptualism, of theory based practise, appropriation and the real. For most post modern theorists, the real world was no more real than the reconstructed world of representation For many artists the act of appropriation was a way of understanding the point in its history that art had reached. They freely borrowed elements from the works of others and added these to their own. The paintings of David Salle are an example of this. Artists also investigated the nature of reality, known as 'the real' and suggested another 'hyper reality' through acts of mimesis. Postmodernism made it possible to argue that art was by definition conceptual and that subjectivity was essential in the construction of meaning of an art object. 

!!ACTIVIST ART.



!Act Up.

Act Up were a group of gay rights activists that included artists, working in America in the 1980s. Act Up created poster campaigns, subverted advertising and made use of official statistics to point out discriminatory practise. 

!Group Material.

A Toronto based group of artists and activists, producing collaborative works, solo works, publishing, running a gallery, and commissioning projects and books who included the painter Jochen Klein. 

!Guerilla Girls.

A group of anonymous feminist activists who were working in New York in the late 1980s and early 90s, the Guerilla Girls were named for their wearing of gorilla masks when they went to organised demonstrations. They also used the banana as an emblem, along with the gorilla suit a prop of slapstick humour and a visual pun on both the diet of gorillas and the offering of an opportunity to institutions who fail to represent women adequately to ‘slip up’ (on the proffered banana skins). The group is thought to have included a number of members who went on to become prominent artists, for example Sue Williams. The Guerilla Girls were a product of an era in which feminism was well established and attention was turned from campaigning against discriminatory practises in everyday life, work and the home, to those in culture. The group produced a number of seminal posters and postcards for example a list of reasons ‘Why There are no Great Women Artists’, and a list of statistics about the proportional representation of women artists in art museums. These texts achieved widespread distribution because they were clever in their use of graphics and advertising to get message across, and because the appearance of the gorilla suited members staging demonstrations at institutions and relevant events was always newsworthy. 

!!PHOTOGRAPHY.



!Berndt and Hilla Becher.

German husband and wife working together born around 1950 whose work became known in the 1980s, series of black and white photos of industrial sites, silos and water towers that imbue the subjects with a formal sculptural quality. 

!Nan Goldin.

During the 1980s and early 1990s American artist Goldin obsessively recorded the lives of her friends photographically. People are photographed sleeping, eating, sober, drunk, fixing up, having sex, getting dressed, in the bath, on the toilet, kissing, cooking, talking, singly and in groups, meeting the camera or looking away. Most of them are artists, musicians, actors and their friends; there are straight and gay couples, single parents, families and children. Goldin creates a sense of a window on private lives but never a sense of intrusion. A subject might have a black eye, or be menstruating. The subjects are always relaxed in the presence of the camera. The resulting hundreds of images were exhibited in groups, usually printed fairly small, approximately fifty cm high. The groups of images became larger and they were installed in grid formation. Ultimately they were shown as a continuously running slide projection of hundreds of images. Goldin’s work became a testament to and document of the lives of a generation many of her whom were of the generation that was most drastically affected by HIV. This body of work is a memorial, although it is not in any sense melancholic but experienced as a record of the intimate lives of one generation of New Yorkers. 

!James Casebeere.

Casebeere made a series of photographs in the late 1980s of scenes that he had constructed entirely from cut, folded and shaped paper, for example a rural scene with a river, trees and a canoe, photographed in black and white. There is no particular attempt at realism or trompe l’oeil, the scenes are a combination of fairytale and cartoon, given a sombre seriousness by the use of black and white. This relates them back to early twentieth century American landscape photography. 

!John Coplans.

Coplans, a British artist born in the 1950s, made black and white photographs of his own naked body and parts of his more or less average male body, including his genitalia, in detailed close up. The texture of his skin, hairs and wrinkles are sharp and nothing is left to the imagination. Coplans presents the male body as a counter to the over exposed female body. His presentation of the male body reveals its frailty, and significantly it is an entirely unsexualised presentation. 

!Philipe Lorca di Corcia.

Photographer who takes images of everyday scenes and shows them in groups. 

!Michel Francois.

Belgian artist who makes large scale photographic installations. 

!Gilbert and George.

Two British artists born in the 1950s who have lived and worked together in a longstanding partnership. They began to work together in their twenties, when they moved into a house in London’s East End and began their existence life as living art, their daily lives rigidly habitual. Gilbert and George became as well known for their lifestyle and their deadpan personae as for their work; in the early years of their careers rarely speaking about their work or lives together. They parried all interviewers’ questions by assuming an impenetrably eccentric manner so that was never clear whether or not they were having the last laugh. Gilbert and George lived together in a sparsely furnished house, wore tweed suits, hats and overcoats, ate in the same café every day of the year, and were never seen without each other. Their early work was performance: they held soirées with invited performers, conducted with an anachronistic formality, including letterpress invitation cards. They became well known for their work ‘Underneath the Arches’, made in about 1975, for which they became ‘singing sculptures’. They stood on a plinth, their clothes and bodies entirely covered in silver paint, underneath the arches of one of the bridges over the river Thames and sang the music hall song of the same name continuously. In the 1980s Gilbert and George began to make the collaborative photographic work for which they are now known, photo collages made by taking self portraits, in which they appeared full length, usually one on each side of the image using the kind of symmetry found in religious diptychs. Initially these were small black and white works, the subject matter of which included images of London, flowers and plants, often repeated in a mirror image. Later they began to photograph young men and boys that they had met around London and the compositions began to have a scatological and sexual theme and were often directly abusive. By the 1990s, Gilbert and George were making works that set out to shock, using images of human faeces and naked men, including themselves. The images are printed in square sections which are placed together in a grid to make a large image often three metres square. Each section has a thin frame which is usually red so that there is no pretence that the work is one large image. The Gilbert and George photo collage became an instantly recognisable trademark. 

!John Hilliard.

British artist who makes photographs of landscape and architecture, presented on wall mounted light boxes. 

!Sylvia Kowalski.

American conceptual artist. 

!Robert Mapplethorpe.

A photographer working in New York in the 1980s and early 90s, Mapplethorp became notorious for his photographs of gay men. The men are often naked or semi clothed, and the images are sexually unambiguous such as Man in a Polyester Suit which shows an African American man resting his penis on a stool, and another photograph showing a man urinating into another’s mouth, both men dressed in leather. Photographs like these led to Mapplethorpe being attacked by the Christian right and his exhibitions were denounced as pornography. The fact that museums spent public money on exhibiting Mapplethorpe's work led to a full scale row in the United States senate and other artists were dragged into the debate. Senator Jesse Helms led the attack supported by The Association for the American Family and religious organisations. The result was a substantial decrease in the amount of support given to artists by the National Endowment for the Arts, the United States government arts subsidy fund. The existing obscenity laws were reassessed and there was a call for a revision of the censorship laws in order to make it easier to close an exhibition or require special conditions to be met. There were many counter claims, not just by Mapplethorpe, of discrimination on the grounds of sexuality. Mapplethorpe said of his work that he photographed images of love and trust, and that even the most ‘sado masochistic’ of his images represented supreme trust, love and vulnerability on the part of the participants. His defenders claimed that if his images were of heterosexual couples there would have been no such outcry. The case went to court and a ruling was made that the photographs defined as obscene could only be exhibited in a specially constructed screened off area, with a clear indication to the public of the contents of these works. The case increased the public interest in the work and made Mapplethorpe one of the best known photographers in the world. Mapplethorpe’s themes were love, sex and death. He made many self portraits the best known of which shows him wearing a leather biker jacket with chains and a leather cap. Another shows Mapplethorpe as a young man standing on a fire escape with the singer Patti Smith. A photograph taken just before his death shows a visibly frail Mapplethorpe holding a cane topped with a skull and crossbones emblem. Mapplethorpe made a series of photographs of flowers, mostly lilies and other exotic flowers, which are also sexual images, sometimes reminiscent of Georgia O’Keefe paintings, usually in black and white but some are colour. He also photographed the body builder Lisa Lyon, whose physique he considered to be perfect. Robert Mapplethorpe died in 1994. 

!Andres Serrano.

Serrano, an American artist born in the 1950s, is notorious for his work Piss Christ, which caused a furore and demands for its censorship on the grounds of obscenity and blasphemy from American right wing and religious groups. Serrano immersed a cheap plastic figure of Christ on the cross in a tank of his own urine with a light behind it and took a photograph. Christ is seen submerged in a red and golden light resulting in an image of glorification. Serrano, brought up as a Catholic, continued to make controversial images such as the Last Supper and a Pieta (both black statuettes immersed in tanks, with the bubbles adhering to them adding texture. He made a series of photographs of the blending of blood and milk in a dish, and of spurts of semen frozen in mid air at the point of ejaculation – white streams on a black background, and a series of images made in a morgue of corpses titled by the way in which they died; drowned, poisoned, stabbed. Serrano stated that all his work was an entirely respectful investigation into sex, life and death and the relation of these to spirituality and religion. 

!John Stezaker.

British artist born in the 1950s who makes photographic collage and printed work. Stezaker has made photographs of landscapes reflected in water, which he presents upside down so that they appear to be the right way up at first. He has made a series of large black and white prints based on an old photograph of a nude, which he has distorted. 

!Susan Trangmar.

British artist born in the late 1950s who makes photographic work. 

!Hannah Villiger.

Villiger made a series of Polaroid photographs of her own naked body holding the camera at arms length. The resulting series of images (it took several to document the whole of her body in this way) are printed enlarged so that the parts of Villiger are life size, and exhibited in a row. 

!Jo Spence.

A British artist born in the late 1940s who made photographic work from the 1970s onwards. Spence, a large woman, used herself and her male partner as models to make a number of works that explore preconceived ideas about ideal beauty, masculine and feminine identity and relations. The photographs were sometimes printed life size. In the 1980s Spence developed breast cancer but continued to photograph her ravaged body during and after mastectomy and radiotherapy. Spence’s photographs are often accompanied with written text in a diary format. 

!!PERFORMANCE.



!Bobby Baker.

A British performance artist born around 1950 who made a series of performances based on food in the 1980s. Baker returned to art in her late forties after raising a family and training as painter, but began to make performance art when she found that a painter’s life was not compatible with bringing up a family. She found a parallel between painting and its history and the creativity inherent in domestic and family life. In her first performance, ‘Drawing on a Mothers Experience’ she made a ‘painting’ by telling the story of the night one of her children was born by presenting samples of the food that she consumed before and during her labour and using it to make a painting on a bed sheet. She dripped black treacle, splattered jam, and printed with steaks. The resulting work was intended to be compared to an abstract expressionist painting. Baker obliterated it by sieving icing sugar over it and rolled herself up in the sheet. An Edible Family in a Mobile Home was a family constructed from cake and icing and placed in a caravan. Baker also staged a performance in her own home, inviting the audience into her kitchen to watch her discuss menial domestic tasks and what she enjoys about them, for example the freshness of washed cabbage leaves and the fun of icing (she poses on a revolving cake stand). After each action she pins a symbolic item onto her white coat. Baker also did a performance in which she gets into a bath of chocolate custard. Baker draws on the work of 1970s feminist artists who made the domestic their subject but adds humour. 

!Leigh Bowery.

A British fashion designer, club promoter and artist whose work defies definition but was very influential, Bowery always wore his own designs, usually involving heavily padded lycra, to change his shape substantially. He was known for his mask like make up, often with big black eyes, rubber and fetish wear, extremely high heeled shoes and boots. He morphed between a male and female look, both sexual and asexual. Bowery's club night Taboo inspired a generation of people to dress up, and he became an icon, eventually exhibiting himself in the window of a London gallery as a living work of art. Bowery died in the 1990s in his late thirties. 

!Cosey Fanni Tutti.

British video and performance artist who has been working since the 1960s. Fanni Tutti’s most recent work is painting. The work for which she is best known is a series of live events made on her own and with the band COUM transmission (later to become Throbbing Gristle). Fanni Tutti often appeared half naked. One image is always associated with her showing her reclining on a bed, wearing underwear but bare breasted and wearing a blindfold. She made a number of photographic works imitating soft porn photography. 

!Karen Finley.

Karen Finley is an American performance artist whose work, like Mapplethorpe's, attracted the attention of the American Christian Right. Finley received public funding and became notorious when she was banned from performing a work in which she inserted pieces of yam into her vagina. When she brought this work to London the venue at which she was to perform was forced to bow to local authority pressure and ban it. Finley continued to make controversial performance work centring around themes of child abuse, sexual identity and the female body, often in the form of a monologue by a character who was in turns aggressive and profane. 

!Rose Finn Kelcey.

British artist born in the 1950s, Finn Kelcey made a number of performance works in the 1980s and early 1990s, one using shadow puppets. In the late 1990s she made Matador, a work for which she trained as a matador in Spain and took part in a bullfight, a work which existed only as documentation. She later made an installation titled Steam Bed, which consisted of a large square brushed steel trough from which copious amounts of steam were emitted which was sucked towards an extractor fan of the same dimensions as the trough, creating an illusory solid form, a cube of steam between the two. 

!Ukeles Mierle Laderman.

Laderman is an American artist who made a collaborative work with the New York Sanitation Department in the 1980s. She staged a performance in which she shook the hand of every sanitation worked in New York, an action that highlighted the social invisibility of the waste disposal workers, those who carry out a daily task without which life would become untenable. Another part of this project was the design and construction of a refuse collection cart with mirrored sides which was used on the daily refuse collection round. As it travelled the city streets the people that created the refuse contained in it were reflected clearly in its sides. 

!James Luna.

Born around 1950, Luna is a Native American living on a reservation who was known for his socio political art projects highlighting the discrimination against Native American Indians. The best known of his works is a performed installation for which Luna had himself tranquillised and placed in a display case in a museum of native American artefacts during museum opening hours. He remained in the case every day for a month, under close supervision. 

!Bruce Maclean.

Scottish artist MacLean was born in the 1940s who made his best known work in London in the 1970s and 80s. He made paintings, colourful gestural abstracts and performances, in which he was seen smoking a pipe and wearing a trilby hat. 

!Alistair Maclennan.

A Scottish performance artist working in the late 1970s and 80s who made a controversial work at the Institute of Contemporary art in London in 1981 call Still Tills. McLennan spent a week living in the gallery eating and sleeping surrounded by food, detritus and waste including bodily waste. He also sorted through and arranged bags of refuse, which as the press reported included sanitary protection and nappies. The title of the work was a comment on the end of consumerism and shopping and the beginning of a new self sufficiency and the artist was trying to show the possibility of this by living without purchasing anything for a week. Other works of McLennan's were similarly time and endurance based. 

!Hermann Nitsch.

Austrian performance artist who pioneered Viennese Actionism which is the name he gave to his live art practise which consisted of solo works and events or happenings that involved a large number of people. Nitsch's performances usually took the form of some kind of self devised ritual, echoing religious, pagan or tribal sacrificial events and usually involves a degree of self inflicted pain or endurance, and often large amounts of animal blood and carcasses. The events are conducted with great solemnity and conviction. The large scale events have taken place in various locations, sometimes outdoors. In one a number of volunteers were crucified and the participants covered in blood. Nitsch thought of the blood as paint which he used to record of the event, producing large numbers of paintings and works on paper as well as photo and video. Nitsch is perhaps best known for a performance in which he reputedly cut off (or at least mutilated) his own penis. This is apparently documented by a series of photographs, which show Nitsch bandaging various parts of his body. 

!Gina Pane.

British performance artist who made endurance works, most infamously one in which she continually bit her fingers in an attempt to loosen and remove her fingernails, periodically rinsing them in a bowl of milk. She also made a performance during which she inserted rose thorns into her skin. Pane was one of a number of artists working in Britain in the 1980s that resisted the idea of art as a commodity instead using their own bodies as medium and subject. 

!Annie Sprinkle.

An American ex prostitute, artist and performer who is best known and in fact notorious for a live work in which she reclines on an armchair and invites the audience to examine her vagina through a speculum, to masturbate her and to ask her any questions they want. 

!Station House Opera.

British performance art group led by Julian Maynard Smith who came to prominence in the 1980s with highly formalised repetition based works. Performers dressed in ordinary clothes and not speaking would carry out everyday actions repetitively, without making allowance for each other’s movements but avoiding collision. The performers obeyed a set of rules and together a counterpoint effect was achieved as in the work Table Move, which consisted of performers moving furniture obsessively around a stage. Later works built on the idea of physical risk, involving the performers in a variety of increasingly dangerous endurance based works. One involved the performers sitting on and using furniture including tables, chairs and cupboards, while suspended high above a pedestrian area from the outside of a building. Another, Bastille Dances, consisted of a day long construction and dismantling of a model of the Bastille form polystyrene blocks. 

!Stelarc.

Australian artist who made performance works involving physical endurance and technology. For one performance he inserted several hooks into his flesh and suspended himself from these, his body hanging horizontally from a bridge over Sydney Harbour. Stelarc was interested in the body as a machine and for another work he had a robotic arm constructed, which was connected to his brain via electrodes so that he could control it by thought. 

!Gary Stevens.

British artist born in the 1950s who made a number of performance works in the 1980s which took place in galleries. In his work Stevens adopted a stylised performing persona and often used large numbers of soft toys. 

!Andre Stitt.

British performance artist. 

!Steven Taylor Woodrow.

A British performance artist who made a number of solo and group performances in the 1980s, his solo work consisting mainly of theatrical poetry readings, in which Taylor Woodrow appeared as a kind of Victorian gothic character behind a lectern reading Dada poetry accompanied with pyrotechnics and fire breathing. Taylor Woodrow is best known for The Triptych Man and The Living Paintings, made between 1985 and 88. The Triptych man was a performance for three people who were inserted into a costume made from three men’s suits sewn together so that it had only three arms and legs each wide enough for two people’s limbs. The wearing of this forced the performers into a triangular formation, facing outwards, bound to and supporting each other but unable to see each other and only able to move by bouncing. The Triptych man performed for several hours at a time, never speaking but often approaching people and sometimes remaining still for long periods while the performers rested. The Living Paintings was static work for three performers, who were hung from the wall by a concealed harness wearing suits, painted a solid colour with matching makeup on any exposed skin and hair and contact lenses that featured an enlarged cornea with a white iris. These performers also remained silent, relying for effect on inspiring embarrassment, uncertainty, and a desire to communicate in the viewer. 

!Wolf Vostell.

Vostell, a German action artist working in the 1980s, organised large public performances in German cities, often involving pyrotechnics and explosives. His interventions into public life were deliberately meant to refer to terrorist actions, and were intended to be disruptive although the formal and sculptural qualities of his actions were as important as their political aspect. For one action he released a large amounts of smoke at a specific sites and times. He led a group of people about a city ending in a derelict excavated site. His ambitious works were extensively documented and Vostell wrote in detail about each one. 

!Sylvia Ziranek.

British performance artist who made a number of works in the 1980s and has also published written work. Ziranek's invented persona was central to her work and this was carried through into her appearance – she always dressed in bright pink and often has pink hair. 

!!INSTALLATION ART.



!Sophie Calle.

A French artist born in the 1950s who has made a large body of project and research based work. Calle's Following Piece is perhaps her best known work, a performative project made in Venice for which she selected a man to follow for a month. He never became aware of her constant presence until the project was over since Calle adopted the techniques of undercover surveillance in her project, keeping a detailed diary with photographs, which she made into a series of text panels and presented as a documentary installation. For another incognito work, Chambermaid, presented as text and image on the wall, Calle got a job as a chambermaid in a hotel. She searched the rooms and luggage that she cleaned and made lists of what she found and what she deduced about the occupants of the room – the kind of people they were, what their occupations were, why they were staying in the hotel. She photographed the rooms and things in them that interested her. Calle's interest in these works was in what the viewer could discover about an absent subject from the visual world that surrounds them and in how that subject can be reconstituted. The viewer of the work is made aware of their position as voyeur which they share with the artist. Calle subsequently continued her interest in subjectivity but began to work with people rather than observing them unseen. The Blind involved asking blind from birth and those who had lost their sight since birth to describe images. These descriptions are presented in place of images on the walls of a gallery giving a privileged place to the images of the mind's eye, images that would never normally become concrete. For a similar work made with museum attendants Calle asked those who worked in a certain museum to describe the paintings that they observed daily in the course of their employment when those paintings were not present because they were on loan. The resulting descriptions were placed on the wall in the place of the loaned exhibit. The discrepancies in the descriptions made the viewers subjectivity very obvious; descriptions of the same work would vary greatly, placing an object in a painting that was not there for example, adding something new to a painting or changing the composition of the colours. 

!Guillaume Bijl.

Belgian artist Bijl is known for his perfect recreations of very ordinary spaces. Each installation he creates in a gallery is a recreation down the last detail of a particular place, for example a gym, a supermarket, a beauty salon, another gallery and a bookshop. These spaces would be usable for their projected purpose, such is the attention to detail, but their remain functionless and empty, and such is their purpose. They are three dimensional facsimiles, all the more unreal for being so real. 

!Christian Boltanski.

Boltanski is a German artist who made large scale installation and site specific works and is particularly interested in socio political issues, in the memorial, and in the legacy left for the living by the dead. One work was sited in a gap in a terrace of houses, a bombed out house never rebuilt. Boltanski discovered the names of the people who had lived in the house and inscribed them on the walls that still retained details of the interior of the house such as fireplaces, wall paper and paint. Another work consisted of a larger number of leather suitcases that referred to the luggage left by those killed during the holocaust. 

!Sonia Boyce.

British artist working in the 1980s onwards who made work dealing with racial awareness and black identity. 

!Ian Breakwell.

A British artist whose career began in the 1970s, Breakwell is best known for his written diaristic work. He made a number of pieces with large amounts of densely handwritten text, often detailing his own life and observations about life. He also used photographs. In the 1980s he made a performance in which the audience was confronted with a stage curtain. When it opened they were faced with a painted audience and the back of a proscenium arch, and in fact they themselves were on stage. 

!Jan Fabre.

Belgian artist Fabre is very interested in insects and since the 1970s he has been making large scale theatrical performances usually featuring himself and others dressed as insects or in costumes covered with insects. Fabre also makes objects and paintings encrusted with insects, particularly beetles, the dark iridescence of their wings and shells fascinates him. 

!Ovind Fahlstrom.



!Sylvie Fleury.

French artist working from the 1980s onwards. Fleury is interested in consumerism and in the relation between fashion and desire. One work consisted of shopping bags from different high fashion shops, placed in a casual arrangement on a plinth so that the bags themselves took on a significance beyond their actual existence as carrier of luxury goods, to even transcend this, so clearly did their names, logos, colours and designs advertise a particular way of life, style and aspiration. Fleury also made works with shoes. 

!Susan Collins.

UK artist who pioneered the use of holograms in art in the early 1980s, Collins later worked with sound digital technology and the internet. 

!Ian Hamilton Finlay.

Scottish artist who since the 1970s has made, and continues to make site specific outdoor installations. Hamilton Finlay carves text into stone panels and blocks, inscribed in simple classical fonts, single words and phrases that relate to landscape in which they are placed. His intention is to integrate words with landscape. These installations are sometimes small scale but may also be installed over a large area of land, such as in a park often as a permanent work. Hamilton Finlay's work is probably best known as photographic documentation. 

!David Hammons.

Artist whose work investigates cultural and ethnic identity. 

!Mona Hatoum.

Hatoum is a British artist born in the 1950s in Lebanon who makes installation and video work. Hatoum’s work investigates the extremes of human nature and cruelty, alluding to the repressive practises of certain regimes in the Middle East and their effect on the life of women in particular. In an early video work the veiled face of a woman has the shadows of Arabic text falling across her face and a certain point a knife is drawn across her eyes as if to cut them open. A later installation consists of a long totally dark corridor constructed within a gallery, at the end of which is dimly visible a red glow. The curious viewer will walk along the corridor and the glow becomes brighter, revealing itself to be several vertical bars of red light. Only at close proximity does it become apparent that the light source is electric heater elements. The effect of this on the viewer is to give the sense that they might burn themselves by being lured towards the red hot bars. Another installation employing a similar economy of means consists of three banks of wire mesh lockers, arranged to create a ‘room’. Hanging from the ceiling is an unshaded electric light bulb which slowly descends and rises into and out of the locker space. The shadows cast by the wire grid construction of the lockers grow large and shrink in the most sinister fashion. In the late 1990s Hatoum moved on from the almost theatrical effects created by these installations to create more video work. In a video installation called Deep Throat displayed in a wooden kiosk, Hatoum showed a film made by a medical camera travelling through the various orifices of a woman’s body. Like all her work the visceral impact of this work leads to secondary reflections on imprisonment and torture. 

!Susan Hiller.

British artist born in the 1950s, Hiller makes installations usually with video which is often projected, works on paper and often three dimensional objects and structures. She is interested myth, religion, ritual, literature, grand narrative, and psychoanalysis. Belshazzar's Feast made in the late 1980s takes the biblical reference of its title as a starting point for one work. A sitting room ‘set’ with sofas, coffee table, lamps and sideboard contains a television where the fireplace would be. On the television is a film of showing a burning fire, as if to illustrate that television is the hearth around which we gather. On the wall is automatic writing (a reference to the writing on the wall by the unseen hand that takes place at Belshazzar’s Feast) done by Hiller. Another work features giant shadow puppets of Punch and Judy and other folkloric characters, made into a film projected to cover all four walls of a gallery space, the silhouetted characters looming and distorted. Hiller made a site specific work at the Freud Museum in London (the home of Sigmund Freud) for which she presented a series of cardboard boxes containing text and objects and made photographs of Freud’s ethnographic collection. 

!Jenny Holzer.

Holzer works in a variety of media using text. During the 1980s Holzer made a series of works featuring slightly altered popular sayings that she titled Truisms. These were political statements that subverted commonly used truisms to make points about consumerism, subjectivity and art. The Truisms featured on T shirts, till receipts in shops, park benches, digital display boards above Times Square and Piccadilly Circus, LED displays in public places, posters and leaflets. Holzer employed the various methods of public display and dissemination of information for the presentation of her work. 

!Stewart Home.

British artist and writer who has written about punk, art and performance, including writing and photographing performer Cosey Fanni Tutti. Home has also made work on paper and installation, such as the Art Bed, an ordinary single bed with a bedspread on which the viewer is invited to recline. 

!Rebecca Horn.

Artist born in the 1950s who makes sculptures that are largely concerned with the human body. Horn’s work is often presented as installations and she sometimes makes kinetic work. An example of this is apiece called The Conductor, which is a white non sighted person’s stick suspended in space over a metal plate. An invisible magnetic field causes the stick to dance spasmodically, making a tapping and scraping sound when it touches the metal plate. It seems to be wielded by an invisible person, and appears quite threatening to the viewer. A piano hangs from the ceiling, its insides exploding out periodically, catching the viewer unaware as the lid springs open and all the strings sound and the hammers slide out. Another work consists of a large number of hoses strewn over a whole exhibition space, all leading to something which is operated by an air bladder. The hoses are full of compressed air and the whole operation seems to be random. A work which is visually similar to this is a dressmaker's dummy holding a dress made from transparent tubing which is full of red liquid, which is pumped around the dress as if the tubes were an arterial system. Horn has also made a dress, again displayed on a dummy, from large pieces of meat sewn together. Much of Horn’s work involves the construction of strange garments, such as the gloves with one metre long pointed finger extensions. She often makes work which impedes and transforms the function of the body, or places its inner workings on the outside. Her work has a fairy tale atmosphere that is quite frightening. 

!Ilya and Emilia Kabakov.

The Kabakovs are a Russian artist couple who have made a large number of installations which comment on Russian (both Soviet and post soviet) social order, and on the position of the individual in a totalitarian society. The Kabakov's work is often optimistic, sometimes didactic and engenders a feeling of the possibility of escape in the viewer. A work made in the late 1980s consists of a bedroom constructed inside a gallery space, the structural walls entirely freestanding so that the viewer is presented with a wooden box. Through the open door the viewer can see into the room which is full of books and comic books and magazines, a bed and some rudimentary furniture. A life size realistic dummy of a aircraft pilot who has apparently ejected from a plane has parachuted through the ceiling, bring the ceiling down and spreading rubble over the tiny room. The pilot is suspended, his parachute harness caught in the roof. The Kabakov’s also made a very large scale installation based on Vladimir Tatlin's tower, a spiral construction. This installation consists of the tower, and several interlinked spaces with doors and windows, a kind of maze the whole of which is roughly constructed of unpainted light coloured wood. Viewers enter the structure and negotiate the spaces, eventually climbing to the top of the tower on its helter skelter like steps. At the top of the tower and in the rooms are various objects, images and texts to contemplate, often placed on school desks. There is quite a lot to read. 

!Karen Knorr.

British artist born around 1960 whose conceptual text and photographic image work is concerned with the interrogation of the institution. 

!Jannis Kounellis.

Greek artist who was very successful in the 1980s with a number of large installations to do with the relation of cultural history to the modern world. Kounellis used the image of the horse quite a lot, as well as working in steel construction and using soot or smoke like pigment. 

!Barbara Kruger.

Kruger made a seminal body of work feminist and political in the 1980s using photographic collage and text. Using skills developed in her paid job in graphic design Kruger began to juxtapose generic images with generic phrases and slogans that she slightly altered to make a political point, appropriating graphic styles from Russian constructivist art and socialist graphics. For example, a female hand with long immaculately manicured nails in black and white with the slogan in bold Helvetica black ‘protect me from what I want’ diagonally across the image. A closed eye appropriated from a surrealist photograph is captioned ‘I am your almost nothing’. One of her most copied slogans is ‘I shop therefore I am’. Kruger’s skill was in the juxtaposition of slogan and image producing a powerful effect. She rarely used colour but when she did it was almost always red. Her work was produced as postcards and achieved wide dissemination making her one of the best known artists of her generation. 

!Lucia Nogueira.

South American artist born in the 1950s and died in the 1990s who made installations from glass beads and blown glass placed on the floor and hanging. 

!Cady Noland.

American artist who is known for her scatter works in the 1980s in which she placed objects on the floor of a gallery and for her scaffolding pole constructions. 

!Cornelia Parker.

British artist born in the 1950s whose best known work is Cold Dark Matter an Exploded View made in the late 1980s. This work consists of the hundreds of fragments of a garden shed and its contents, destroyed by the artist in a controlled explosion. The fragments are displayed hung from invisible thread to form a shed shape, as if the shed has been frozen in the act of exploding and the fragments stopped in time. For Thirty Pieces of Silver Parker flattened silver ware and other silver plated objects such as a trumpet and suspended the silver on threads to hover just above the floor. A similar work used a steam roller to roll over a trail of silver ware. Parker’s interest in the transformation or destruction and representation of objects continued with a work in which she melted down a gun and recast it as a solider and therefore unusable form, an LP which she reduced to shavings by playing it with a blade instead of a needle, and other works involving dust and shadows. 

!Adrian Piper.

British artist who makes work about ethnicity. 

!Lawrence Wiener.

American artist born in the 1940s who is an influential conceptual artist working exclusively with text. Wiener made a replica of the Rosetta stone that is ten metres across. He made a great number of gallery installations that consist of transfer lettering applied to the wall to his specification, presenting a text that he had written, much or all of which is often crossed through. He also made typed and printed work on paper and paintings of text. Wiener’s work was an investigation into the nature of language and specifically into the written word, taking the postmodern debate about language as a system of signs and signifiers and making it the subject of his work. In Wiener’s work the meaning of the words, the action of reading by the viewer and the visual presence of the words combine to make a work of art. 

!Fred Smith.

American artist working from the 1980s onwards who makes socially engaged installation art. Smith is interested in ethnicity, cultural identity and institutional representations of different cultures. He has often been invited to make installations in museums, for example he has swapped exhibits from ethnographic collections with those from nineteenth century decorative arts collections. 

!Kate Smith.

British artist born around 1960 who makes installation and photographic work, which has sometimes featured shoes. Smith’s work is rooted in her interest in psychoanalytical and feminist theory. 

!Rosemarie Trockel.

Artist born in the 1950s who makes knitted paintings, panels made on a knitting machine using jacquard techniques placed on stretches, as well as balaclavas and gloves. Trockel uses various motifs such as the hounds tooth from the check pattern, and the playboy bunny, both of which appear incongruous when translated into knitting. 

!!FILM AND VIDEO.



!Cheryl Donegan.

Donegan is an American video artist whose work investigates the sculptural and painterly possibilities of everyday activities. In Sunflower, she spins on grass with a bottle of yellow paint attached to her waist, it sprays out and slowly paints a circle. In Kiss My Royal Irish Ass she paints her buttocks green and sits on sheets of paper, three times on each to make a clover leaf painting. In another work she suggestively and lasciviously drinks milk that is spraying slowly from a hole made in the side of a plastic bottle and when her mouth is full she sprays the milk on the wall. In another she holds a French stick between her knees and eats it as far down as she can reach. In many ways Donegan's concerns bear comparison to the work of Sarah Lucas, with her interest in how the banal and the domestic can be both sexually suggestive and formally sculptural and humorous. Donegan also makes reference to abstract expressionism and to the ejaculatory possibilities that can be seen in the work of Jackson Pollock, and mocks the machismo inherent in his work with her own abject attempts. 

!Jack Goldstein.

American artist born in the 1950s who has made a number of 16 mm films and videos. Goldstein’s work often has a formal simplicity that belies his choice of medium; he may choose to film something that is barely there or hardly moves. He adds animation to the film, for example in a film of a willow pattern plate, which simply shows the plate seen face on in a static shot, one of the birds in the pattern comes to life and flies off the plate. In another a figure of a person is outlined in tiny red lights and moves, the lights shining blurrily. 

!Chris Marker.

Very influential British underground filmmaker working from the 1970s onwards, whose work is often a collage of images and film clips. Marker’s films are presented as an installation. For example one work is shown on a tower of monitors placed one on top of the other, the same film playing on each but at a different point, so that the images are never the same. 

!Tony Oursler.

American artist who became known for his video installations in the early 1990s for which he filmed himself and other people talking. He made scarecrow like figures with white pillows for heads, some life size some doll sized. The videos are projected on to the pillows, the projector either wall mounted or placed on the floor directly in front of the figure and are very much part of the work. The figures then ‘speak’ to the viewer, usually stream of consciousness babble, often sounding as if they are talking to some kind of therapist or analyst. Sometimes they become distressed and scream. Although patently unreal, the figures seem very real and the viewer has a poignant attachment to them. In one case the projection is onto a heap of clothes as if the person who inhabited them has gone and there is just a soul remaining. In another a pillow on a sofa might carry the projection, or one squashed under a toppled chest of drawers, or stuffed into a suitcase. The general impression is of tortured souls whispering and babbling in uncomfortable positions. 

!Ulrike Rosenbach.

Artist who made video performance work in the 1980s, of which Spinning is an example. The viewer sees an wobbling apparently abstract circular image of spinning dots, which are reflective. On inspection it can be seen that the image is of a woman (probably the artist) wearing a wide net skirt with large sequins on it, who is spinning in one place, seen from directly above her head with her arms clasped around her torso so that only the skirt and the top of her head are visible. The effect is of a spinning glittering disc. As the spinning continues the unsteadiness of the image becomes puzzling as well as disorientating for the viewer. After ten minutes the woman falls down when she is too dizzy to continue. The viewer is also dizzy. When the woman is still but the image is still unsteady it becomes clear that the film is not shot from above but from the ground into a mirror placed above her head, and that it is the mirror that is wobbling. 

!!SCULPTURE.



!Richard Artschwager.

American artist who made sculptures of furniture in the late 1970s and early 80s, around the same time as Ettore Sottsass's Memphis group was making furniture from laminate in Milan. He made a table from a box covered in different printed laminates to indicate legs and a pink tablecloth. Artschwager also made a series of Chippendale chairs flattened out and laminated in unlikely patterns and designs. In these works he was interested in making unlikely combinations of generic form with generic material, forms from the classical era or from antiquity with modern materials. 

!Edward Allington.

Allington is a British sculptor who was part of a group of artists who were making large scale ambitious work in the 1980s and early 90s. His best known work is Horn of Plenty, a cornucopia of found objects. He uses the cornucopia extensively as motif, and was one of the artists invited to propose a work for the empty plinth in Trafalgar square in London in 2001. 

!Ashley Bickerton.

American Bickerton was part of the Neo Geo group of artists who worked in New York in the 1980s. He made a number of wall mounted sculptures that consisted of closed metal boxes, shallow but projecting some distance from the wall, which he covered with stickers and logos, giving them the appearance of both an item of luggage and a sign, its function entirely ambivalent. The stickers themselves were created by Bickerton and were generic types that had no actual reference in the real world to a company, an instruction or an advertisement. Bickerton also made a work in which a life size rubber shark was hung from the ceiling with block and tackle. Hanging from the ropes were also a number of small yachts fenders along with sealed transparent plastic film bags containing some kind of blue gel. 

!Scott Burton.

American artist who made work with furniture. 

!Tony Carter.

British artist born around 1950 made a number of installation works in the 1980s based around an existing narrative or historical events and heavily theorised, for which he created highly finished elements often including printed text and drawings. One such work contained Carter's own casts of several silver buttons from an eighteenth century character’s jacket. Carter gave detailed attention to the display of the elements of his installations, fabricating highly finished display cases and plinths. 

!Helen Chadwick.

A British artist born in the late 1950s Chadwick made sculptural installations and photographic work, often combining the two. Her work dealt with the female body and ideal beauty. One work consisted of light boxes on plinths with photographic images of luxurious and sensual arrangements of hair, ribbon and entrails, and for example length of intestine, braided together. Chadwick often associated the visceral with the luxurious and the interior of the body with its clothed exterior. She was regarded as a feminist artist and in common with other women artists of her generation produced much work dealing with the female body. Another work consisted of a series of wooden boxes of different shape and dimensions, produced to correspond with the size of her own body at various stages in her life so that the box for her birth is new born child sized, another is curved as if a child were curled up, others are standing adult sized. The boxes have photographic transfers in black ink of images of Chadwick at these different ages and they stand in a group. Around the walls of the space in which the boxes are installed are wooden panels with similar images with Latin texts describing the ages of a woman running around the four edges of the panels. The work for which Chadwick is best known is probably Piss Flowers. These are painted casts taken from the space made in snow when Chadwick and her male partner urinated in it. When cast as a positive this space is revealed to have a central column going down and a petal like circle surrounding it, made by the splashes of hot urine on the snows surface and the main stream melting deep into the snow. The male ‘flower’ has a much wider petal arrangement and a shorter ‘stalk’. The female ‘flower’ is the opposite, a result which fired Chadwick’s interest. The Piss Flowers are a nod to Duchamp’s casts of the negative space of male and female genitalia. Chadwick died in the 1990s. 

!Stephen Cox.

British artist born in the 1950s who made carved stone tondos with classical imagery and inscriptions in the 1980s. 

!Dorothy Cross.

Irish artist who makes work from leather and fabric, a kind of feminist surrealism, for example a corset made from leather tanned from a cow’s udders with the udders sticking out. 

!Grenville Davey.

British artist born around 1960 who made very large cast and lacquered fibreglass sculptures in the 1980s and early 90s. Davey created abstract forms that had a functionality about them, like giant lids, plugs or covers, often round, sometimes pairs that seemed that they might fit together. These were perfectly constructed, painted in shiny cream, grey, or white and placed on the gallery floor, often on their curved sides. 

!Jimmy Durham.

A Native Australian artist who makes junk sculptures, which appear to be fetish objects and often have text applied. Durham’s work is concerned with the displacement of the Aboriginal people and their culture. 

!Brian Falconbridge.

Born around 1950, Falconbridge made very small and detailed finely constructed sculptures, often relying on balance and tension in their construction. 

!Jochen Gerz.

Gerz and his partner realised several public sculptures most notably two holocaust memorials. The Sinking Monument is a lead covered square column which is gradually sinking into the ground on which it stands so that over a number of years it will eventually fill a hole exactly its size and disappear for ever. The soft lead surface invites graffiti, as it is very easy to scratch into and the public are invited in to add to it in a reversal of the customary civic practise of removing any graffiti or making it difficult to carry out. Some people engrave the names of those they lost and the monument will take these names underground and they will remain there forever, a subterranean plinth to a memorial plaque on the surface. The other memorial is sited in front of the Reichstag in Berlin. The Gerzs researched with help from student volunteers into a number of Jewish cemeteries known to have been destroyed and built over. Lists of the names of those buried in these places were obtained. At night they removed cobblestones from the street in front of the building and carved the name of one of the deceased on the bottom. The stones would then be replaced. Eventually all of those whose graves had been lost were symbolically reburied in a permanent and subversive act. 

!Laura Godfrey Isaacs.

British artist born around 1960 who made wall reliefs that eventually led to polyurethane foam sculptures reminiscent of the work of Lydia Benglis. The foam in Godfrey Isaacs’ sculptures is brightly coloured with forms often jokily alluding to the female body. 

!Andy Goldsworthy.

British artist born in the 1950s who makes site specific sculptures placed in the landscape. Goldsworthy began in the 1980s to make small sculptures from leaves and twigs, which he would photograph in the landscape. Sometimes he arranged leaves, for example grading the different colours of fallen autumn leaves and arranging them in a pattern or floating them on water. He also used growing plants, staking the branches of willow trees to form a living structure, weaving twigs into circles. He then also used snow to make sculptural forms. Goldsworthy’s work makes reference to the history of ritual and nature and the resulting artefacts. Gradually Goldsworthy’s work became larger scale as he travelled widely in search of new landscapes to work with, for example to Alaska. 

!Antony Gormley.

British artist born in the 1950s who became very well known in Britain when he made a large scale public commission called The Angel of the North. This thirty meter high sculpture is a standing figure with no facial features or detail. Its outstretched arms have become aeroplane wings, the arms spanning about forty meters. The sculpture, which is made from steel is sited by the motorway and railway line from London to Scotland. It can be seen for miles around, and is probably the most visible and best known piece of public art in Britain. Gormley made lead casts of parts of his body for a number of years in the 1980s and 90s. He then began to cast his whole body and make sculptures from beaten moulded and welded lead sheet. The resulting figures are life size and have no detail or features. Where the lead sheets meet they are seamed as if they are made of stitched together pieces of fabric. Some are prone and some are standing. Gormley has conducted a most thorough investigation into the male human form, using a visual anonymity to allow the figures to stand for every person. Gormley became known to a much wider public when he made the participatory work Field in the early 1990s. Field consists of hundreds of forty cm high clay figures, roughly alike, placed shoulder to shoulder in a mass on the floor of the gallery. Field was partly inspired by the terracotta army of seventh century Chinese sculptures found in a burial ground. Wherever field is exhibited it is created anew by local people, each person making their own figure from local clay. 

!Dan Graham.

American artist working in from the 1970s onwards, Graham makes architectural sculptures, usually site specific, from glass and mirrors, simple structures that invite the viewer to enter them. The reflections or the surrounding landscape and of the structure itself cause a sense of disorientation, in particular in terms of which parts of the sculpture are transparent and which are reflective so that there is a confusion about what is a real image and the nature of that reality. The structures are extremely simple and formal, usually human height, often no more that a series of vertical planes placed together at angles and ramps. They are usually placed in the open air as the light of the sky plays an important role in the reflectivity that is part of the work. 

!Thomas Grunefeld.

German artist born in the 1950s known for his stuffed animal sculptures in which different parts of animals are combined to form one hybrid creature that could never exist. Grunefeld uses highly skilled taxidermists to renders these creatures objectively completely convincing as if they were the result of some kind of perverse genetic engineering project. The animals, for example a roster’s feet on a furry mammals body with the tail of a lizard, could have no imaginable purpose, thus they seem like contemporary fantastic beasts. 

!Shirazeh Houshiary.

British artist who makes sculptures, often of metal, with references to Islamic architecture. The surfaces of the sculptures are often etched with Arabic text and Islamic patterning. 

!Bethan Huwys.

Welsh artist who makes very small scale sculptures from natural materials. 

!Neil Jeffries.

British artist who has made folded and painted sheet metal sculptures of people and vehicles from the 1980s onwards which have a toy like, mad inventor quality. 

!Anish Kapoor.

A British artist who began in the late 1970s to make works using pigment, Kapoor was first known for his varying shaped piles of very bright and densely coloured pure pigment arranged on the floor of the gallery. Kapoor then began to make spherical and other shaped structures that he placed on the floor and attached to the wall, the interior of which were coated with pigment. The intense matt quality of the dry powder sucked in light creating oddly disorientating effects and tricks of the eye, something like the effects created by the light works of James Turrell. He also made some work in which large boulders of rock were drilled with cavities filled with pigment. Kapoor made an extremely large installation for a London museum which consisted of a 50 metre high 200 metre long trumpet like structure that tapered into a tube running the length of the museums entrance hall and curved into a second funnel. The work was made with a steel frame attached to which is a dark red rubber skin stretched to a smooth tautness. 

!Jeff Koons.

American artist, formerly a banker, born in the late 1950s who became known in the 1980s for his photographic works based on advertisements. Koons invented magazine advertisements based on existing ones and had them professionally photographed featuring himself as the model. He then placed these ads in art magazines in effect advertising himself, a strategy was intended to show that an artist and a career could be invented and promoted. Having achieved this Koons began to make sculptural works. He first made a marble bust of himself, which he had carved by the best stone carver he could find in white marble with a slight sparkle to it. Koons was one of number of new York artists making work that became known as Neo Geo. His first works were objects in glass cases, for example a baseball, apparently suspended in mid air inside a vitrine on a plinth, and a number of pristine vacuum cleaners in a large case (a pun on the idea of the airless vacuum). Koons then began to design sculptures based on trinkets and souvenirs enlarged to many times their original size and presented on plinths, works which called attention to the status of the work of art, its value, the skill of its making and its authorship, because Koons rarely made anything himself. Instead he ordered his works to be made to his detailed plans by the best crafts people he could find in the medium that interested him. The first was a serried of porcelain sculptures for example one of Michael Jackson reclining with a poodle, some large flowers taken from a children’s model set, and one of an enlarged children’s Cabbage Patch doll. The sculptures were made by the best porcelain artists (in eastern Europe), hand painted, gilded and extremely kitsch but very striking due to their size (about one metre high usually). Koons was interested in how an object of little value other than sentimental value which may however have cost the owner quite a lot (the nature of souvenirs) might be transformed into an art object of immense value despite its bad taste, lack of traditional fine art values and lack of the artists hand in its making. Koons made several groups of works in a similar way, for example cast metal which was highly chromed (a train set which is a decanter glasses and coaster holder, a balloon rabbit), and polychromed wood vases of flowers, extremely detailed pieces of virtuoso carving made in Germany by master carvers. He later made a number of extremely large site specific works, the flower sculptures, for which he again borrowed the talents of others. The first of these was a twenty metre high Scottie dog covered with flowers the colours of which in some way functioned like the dots on a billboard poster. In the mid 1990s Koons married la Cicciolina an Italian porn actress and made a series of photographic works which were styled as stills from a porn film, using professional stylists and photographers once again. The images had a degree of shock value since some featured clearly visible penetration. Koons and Cicciolina stared out at the viewer. The images were odd hybrids of pornography and portrait. After a much publicised divorce from la Cicciolina Koons began in the late 1990s to make two or three metre high paintings of enlarged parts of things, such as balloons, mixtures of toys, household objects and natural things, so enlarged and partially visible as to be hard to interpret. These are painted by his studio assistants to Koons’s designs. 

!Richard Long.

British artist born in the 1950s, Long is a land artist and as such his site specific work exists mostly as documentation. Long began by making walks and documenting them with photographs. He would then mount these photographs relate them to sections of large scale survey maps showing the walk and the north south orientation, and print below them the distance walked as proportion of the total distance of the walk. In doing so he was developing ideas put into practice by American land artist Dennis Oppenheim in the 1960s and 70s, and anther artist who walked along coastlines, the walk, he declared, making a drawing of a line, the line being the demarcation between land and water. This idea of ‘taking a line for a walk’ has been explored by several artists. Long's walks were made all over Britain and then in other countries, they were mostly quite short. In Longs work the land itself, the ground on which we tread and the landscape it forms, is the subject as is artist's subjectivity in terms of choice of and experience of the walk. Long developed his interest in the ground underfoot into an interest in the materials this comprised of and brought clay, earth and stone into the gallery in various forms. He made a number of temporary wall paintings made of mud and clay, thrown at the wall or splashed on with handprints, the mess and drips on the surrounding floor and wall allowed to remain. Long made a circle of white clay splashes on a dark painted wall, or a horizontal band of dark mud on a white wall. He also made rock floor sculptures, which make reference to the work of Carl Andre and Robert Smithson. A piece of the rock from a particular landscape was cut into slices and then fragmented into enormous jagged shards laid out to fill a solid circle or band on the floor, in a sculptural reference to rock strata and man made intervention. 

!David Mach.

British artist born in the 1950s, Mach became known when he made large sculptures from meticulously stacked magazines. These monumental scale sculptures developed and Mach began to use other materials, for example a submarine made from scrapped car tyres, a train made from stacked bricks. Constructed with no fixings, the sculptures have a casual appearance that belies the complexity of their construction, needed to prevent them from collapsing. The sculptures gain their intrinsic strength from the way the stacks are formed and interlinked, but they remain potentially un fixed and are impermanent despite their bulk and weight. 

!Mario Merz.

Italian painter born in 1940s who made sculptures and wall based works which incorporated some illuminated neon tubing. For example and igloo like structure with neon on floor. Paintings with neon arrows. 

!Carl Plackman.

British sculptor who made assemblages with natural materials and steel, particularly favouring pebbles. 

!Sabin, Andrew.

British sculptor who made work with coloured hanging chains. 

!Kiki Smith.

American artist born in the 1940s who makes sculpture characterised by her use of ephemeral and delicate materials like paper, fabric, and beads. Smith often makes life size human figures, animals and birds from paper; sometimes the figures are wearing paper clothes. Her work describes the condition of femininity and of childhood. A naked female figure lies on her side on the ground, strings of glass beads issuing from between her legs as if toe represent blood. A peacock’s tail on the wall has the detail drawn on in pen. like all of Smiths work these are made from white paper stuck together and varnished, so that the final appearance is of a translucent yellowed skin, three dimensional forms which are hollow skins, fragile and ephemeral. 

!Haim Steinbach.

American artist born in the 1950s who became well known in the 1980s for his work including small sculptures on shelves, using cast metal, plastic and laminate. 

!Richard Wentworth.

British artist born in the 1950s who makes sculpture and photographic work. Wentworth observes the everyday life of and use objects and makes sculptures that observe the way in which one thing can be used for another using aluminium buckets, tools, ladders and rope. One work made in the 1980s is called Sinking of the Belgrano and consists of a model battleship in an aluminium bucket on a false surface. Another is a book with a large number of sweet wrappers inserted between the pages in an exaggeration of the potential use of one as a bookmark. For twenty years Wentworth has been photographing the area around Caledonian Road in London where he lives every day. He has a particular interest in the interaction of handcraft, artisanship and making do with the built environment. His collection includes documentation of changing shop fronts and names, appropriate, unusual or inappropriate uses for street furniture, railings and doorways, graffiti, litter and makeshift solutions to broken objects and parts of buildings. Wentworth has also made a large collection of photographs of the way one object is used for a new purpose, for example a saucer wedged in to keep a window open. 

!Alison Wilding.

British artist who makes sculptures from transparent acrylic sheet, slotted together to form complex three dimensional grid structures that take advantage of the way that the edge of the acrylic can be seen as lines in space. Wilding’s sculptures are solid forms that give the impression of being light and delicate. She also makes working drawings which are in effect technical perspective drawings for the sculptures. 

!Hermione Wilshire.

British artist born in the 1950s who makes installations and sculpture. Wilshire has often worked with glass. She blows large globules and droplets of glass and places them over photographs of parts of the human body which are then viewed through the glass, magnified and glowing. One work consisted of glass droplets extruded into stalks which were fixed projecting form the wall, on the bottom of which were fixed photographs of finger prints, as if these had been left in the air. Another consisted of a large number of variable sized glass pebbles on the underneath of which were attached photographs of penises, arranged on the floor as if they had been scattered in a allusion to ejaculation. 

!Bill Woodrow.

British artist born in the 1950s who made installations from collections of waste plastic bottles and containers, arranged by colour and shape on the wall or floor to create an image. Woodrow also made a series of works using discarded refrigerators, washing machines. He cut the form of an object for example a guitar from the metal walls of a washing machine and by bending and folding the metal coaxed it into a convincing representation which remains attached to the washing machine. He also fashioned a broken umbrella into a crow. 

!!PAINTING.



!Craigie Aitchison.

Aitchison is a Scottish painter best known for his 1980s paintings of his pet Bedlington terrier. The dogs are painted in profile on large brightly and flatly coloured canvases. 

!Michael Andrews.

British painter. 

!Basil Beattie.

A figurative painter of the Glasgow school born in the late 1930s Beattie painted fishing boats, ship builders and chip shops lyrically and colourfully. 

!Ida Applebroog.

Applebroog's paintings and free standing works from the late 1980s and early 90s are concerned with memory, childhood and narrative. She often uses the predella form, and uses an image of a film negative as a framing device. The paintings are often constructed from several canvases butted together and freestanding works are propped on the floor upright or placed horizontally. Applebroog made a film with her daughter, film maker and artist Beth B, which is a loose narrative of unhappy childhood with a dreamlike quality. 

!Art and Language.

British artist duo born around 1950 known for their conceptual work text paintings. 

!John Baldessari.

American artist working in the 1970s and 80s who made photo collages typically consisting of black and white photographed images with bold graphic lines and forms added in colour. 

!Jean Michel Basquiat.

Graffiti artist from the Bronx in New York, Basquiat was born in 1973 and died in 1998. He was discovered by a dealer who fostered him and provided him with studio and materials, enabling Basquiat to paint on canvas. He became hugely successful, his work commanded high prices and he was feted by the art world for his work, his looks and his rebelliousness. Basquiat used graffiti tags combined with idiosyncratic signs and symbols creating a way of making a painting that successfully combined street and Afro Caribbean consciousness with abstraction. The outline of a crown, a reference to his own self determined kingship, was his signature, the skull often appeared. He mostly painted in black and bright colours on white ground, drawing in outline and rarely filling in, sometimes used white on black to give a blackboard effect. The apparent naïve style used to issue a series of commands and demands on the world and his viewers, which are both egotistical and irresistible. Unable to cope with his success he became addicted to heroin and died of overdose before he was thirty. Andy Warhol befriended Basquiat towards the end of his life and they made large collaborative paintings together. Basquiat was later mythologised in a feature film of his life made by artist turned director Julian Schnabel. 

!Glen Baxter.

A British artist born in the late 1940s whose cartoon drawings accompanied by text depict events, happenings and people that illustrate a typical Englishness with self deprecating humour, and surreal, slapstick narrative. These cartoons were used by advertisers in the 1990s and Baxter’s work became extremely widely known. 

!Ross Bleckner.

Bleckner was one of a number of painters in working in New York in the 1980s and early 90s who were making monumental scale works. He had a solo exhibition at the Guggenheim in 1992 in which he showed a number of abstract works that looked like starry pieced domes, wavy stripes with ribbon rosettes dotted among them and fuzzy chandelier and flower like compositions. Bleckner's work is sometimes interpreted as having a memorial quality. 

!Eric Bulatov.

Russian artist working in the 1980s and 90s who combined socialist realist imagery, blue skies, and fields with large text painted across the image. 

!Simon Callery.

British artist born around 1960 who made a series of white paintings of banal urban landscapes in the early 1990s. These relied on impasto and tiny amounts of colour in the white to create an almost intangible image. 

!Vija Celmins.

Artist born in the 1940s who has made a large number of paintings and drawings of the sky and the ground. Celmins paints on small landscape format canvases about sixty cm wide or slightly more, using very small brushes or makes drawings of a similar size using pencil. In either case she will draw the most minimal view – a patch of dust on the ground with a few tiny chips of gravel becoming as important as if it were the surface of the moon. She has also drawn the surface of the moon. A tiny part of the night sky becomes a deep blue painting of tiny diamonds. Celmins work brings the minute and the gigantic together but the works have a deceptively modest unassuming appearance. 

!Francesco Clemente.

Italian American painter born in the late 1940s who was extremely successful in the 1980s. Clemente makes figurative painting and works on paper, as well as small scale sculpture and ceramics. His work shows his interest in Indian art, in its colours and in its often spiritual themes. 

!Beryl Cook.

British artist born in the 1940s, usually termed ‘naïve’. Cook paints ordinary women, often rather large both in size and in personality, going about their daily life. Her paintings are humorous and have a strong narrative and simple appeal. Cook is extremely well known in Britain. 

!Enzo Cucchi.

Italian artist who made large scale drawings of classical nudes using an obsessive cross hatched style for which he became very well known in the 1980s. 

!Rita Donagh.

British artist who makes geometric drawings. 

!Paul Eachus.

British painter. 

!Gerard Hemsworth.

British painter born in the 1940s who has taken generic graphic forms and visual jokes as his subject matter. Hemsworth's paintings are made with entirely flat smooth colour and hard edged lines. Typically he will choose one or several diagrammatic representations, such as a cloud, a rabbit or a vase for example, simplify this to the minimum number of lines required and paint it on a pale coloured ground in black. 

!Marlene Dumas.

Dutch painter who makes large figurative works on paper using water colour that usually depict women. 

!Carroll Dunham.

Abstract paintings made from the 1970s to the 2000s, brightly coloured but using a lot of white and the forms outlined in black, featuring blob and disc shapes, painted thickly, like lumps or pompoms. 

!Nicole Eisenman.

American artist who was one of the so called ‘bad girls’, women artists working in the 1990s in New York, using pornographic or otherwise potentially offensive imagery in their work. Eisenman made wall sized paintings depicting pseudo classical scenes. 

!Rainer Fetting.

German painter born in the 1950s who made large figurative paintings, for example one of a row of men in the shower, painted in blues and whites, in an expressionistic style. 

!Gunther Forg.

German artist born in the 1950s who makes paintings, photographs and bronze sculpture. Forg typically places a two meter high black and white photograph in a frame butted up against an abstract painting of a similar size, consisting of very broad straight single brushstrokes and rectangular areas of colour in for examples orangey red and green. His photographs are very often of women (head and shoulders) who look serious. Forg’s bronze sculptures are the same size as the paintings and photographs, in fact they could be described as sculptures of paintings. The bronzes are about thirty cm deep and two metres high rectangular panels standing, in portrait format, on bases which slope straight down from, and are one piece with the panels. The surface of the bronze is covered with impasto marks presumably made in clay with a palette knife, as if to indicate that this might be a cast of a painting. These monolithic objects are placed around the gallery space in relation to the works on the wall. 

!Rebecca Fortnum.

British artist born in the 1960s whose abstract paintings made in the 1980s and 90s have been described as feminist abstraction. Fortnum often painted a cut or slit as a metaphor for the female body, the interior, a metaphor employed by many women artists in the 1980s and early 90s. This arose from readings of Lacan, a French psychoanalyst whose ideas about ‘lack’ in the female psyche and about language and femininity were taken up by feminist artists and theorists. Fortnum was also interested in a general discussion about the female body as a ‘text’ (in the sense of the term used in literary theory) and the ‘writing out’ or performing of that text being essential to the representation of femininity. Fortnum’s paintings were intended to symbolise this lack, and the writing out of the female, by the painted slit or cut, (never an actual cut) and by text she wrote on the canvas, sometimes unreadable writing like marks, sometimes actual words. Fortnum’s paintings are very large, up to three metres high, and she predominantly used dark reds and browns, fairly flat colours except where she chose to paint the slit, which is made with very thick paint squeezed and brushed. Writing is done with a small brush in a flowing hand, usually a single line of text running horizontally across the painting. 

!Gillian Ayres.

British artist who made brightly coloured, abstract impasto paintings throughout the 60s to the 90s. 

!Pamela Golden.

British painter. 

!Maggi Hambling.

British artist who began painting portraits in the 1960s. 

!Keith Haring.

American artist, now dead, who began as a graffiti artist in the early 1980s in New York. Haring developed a distinctive graphic style, using bold lines to outline his figures, animals and symbols, and filling them in with plain flat colour. Once he became known, Haring began to make his work on canvas and made a lot of printed works, books and ultimately merchandise. Today Haring’s simple lexicon of symbols and figures is instantly recognisable. He always outlined them in black and filled the background in with small marks, painting hearts, hands, animals and figures which rarely have features. One of his best known images is of a red heart on a yellow background, the heart surrounded by lines as if to indicate that it is beating. Haring most often used the primary colours yellow and red, and black. Haring made a lot of political posters about AIDS, and his graphic style was particularly suited to campaigning on various issues. 

!Tim Head.

Since the late 1970s Head has made work in a variety of media. He has often focused on generic and graphic imagery which he has abstracted and reconstructed in various ways, both as sculptural form, painting and works on paper. In the 2000s Head began to work with digital animations, using the pixels that usually constitute the image of video and manipulating their colours to create abstract colour fields of constantly changing coloured squares. These are projected very large, and make immediate visual connection with pointillism and with the dot matrix printing process familiarised by advertising hoardings. Head has created a moving abstract work from pixels, literally the stuff that images are now made from. 

!Peter Howson.

British artist who makes paintings and drawings, travelling to several war zones as a war artist. 

!John Hoyland.

British painter who makes figurative paintings. 

!Jorg Immendorff.

German artist Immendorff achieved success in the 1980s with his expressionist twentieth century history paintings often featuring the eagle of the third Reich, nightclub and café scenes and musicians. Immendorff's earlier work had been performative: he invented a concept called Lidl, which consisted of an imaginary town and trailed a brick with the world Lidl on it in and out of shops. Immendorff was arrested by the police a few times for his performance activities. 

!Callum Innes.

Innes is best known for his work white on white abstract paintings made in the early 1990s. 

!Bert Irvin.

British painter born in the 1930s who made large abstract paintings usually by pouring very brightly coloured paint onto a white ground, sometimes only a few stripes of red yellow, green and blue paint across the bottom corners of a canvas. 

!Vanessa Jackson.

British artist born around 1950 who makes abstract paintings. 

!Ben Johnson.

British photo realist painter born in the late 1950s. 

!Joy Clair.

British painter born in around 1960 who painted skies with clouds in the 1980s and later made pattern paintings. 

!Alex Katz.

American painter who has made large figurative paintings since the early 1970s on the subject of landscape and his family. Katz paints with flat acrylic paint, making each work in a day applying the paint simply and with no texture. Katz painted a row of autumnal trees, trees in blossom, his wife (repeatedly), his children and groups of friends, all shown in casual poses. The photographic source of Katz's work is deliberately evident because he is interested in highlighting that conjunction of distance and intimacy. 

!John Keene.

British painter chosen to record the Gulf War for Britain. Keene later travelled to Afghanistan to record the war there, having become very interested in the depiction of armed conflict. 

!Bhupen Khakur.

Artist born around 1930 who is one of the few Indian contemporary painters to become well known outside of India. Khakur’s figurative paintings depicted his life, often intimately, and included sexual acts with male partners. Khakur showed India in a contemporary way unhampered by the history of Indian art but at the same time he made this a part of his work, which shows in particular the influence of Indian miniatures. Khakur died 2003. 

!Anselm Kiefer.

Keifer is a German expressionist painter who has made paintings and sculpture, both on a large scale, tending towards the monumental from the 1970s onwards. He is often considered to be one of the most important painters of the 1980s because he evolved a contemporary purpose for expressionistic painting and because of the operatic scale of his work. Keifer’s paintings generally depict bare depopulated interiors, for example one that shows an attic like space, which is entirely composed of painted wooden planks. He used a restrained palette of earth colours, black and white with dark reds and blues, and his work often has a atmosphere of darkness and foreboding. Keifer’s sculpture is often presented as an installation, for example a row of hospital beds, the sheets actually made of lead sheet, draped over the beds, in the centre of which are shallow depressions some of which are filled with water, as if to denote the transformation or passing of the occupant of the bed. 

!Martin Kippenberger.

One of the greatest German postmodern painters, born in the 1950s Kippenberger was extremely prolific, producing large and small paintings and objects, usually abstract with collaged elements. He often added stickers and found labels to his paintings. Kippenberger made a series of drawings on hotel notepaper every time he stayed anywhere. He designed all his own invitation cards and other publicity, seeing these as part of his artistic output. 

!Linda Kitson.

British painter and war artist. 

!Leapman David.

British artist who began working in the mid 1980s making paintings which used repeating motifs on a plain ground, the lines themselves removed from the surface of the canvas revealing under the plain flat colour very bright multicoloured painting. He later began to use fluorescent colours. 

!Rosa Lee.

One of generation of British women artists born in the early 1960s who developed a self defined ‘feminist abstraction’ that owed much to Brigit Riley. Their work defined itself by its relation to the 1980s and 90s feminist critique of abstract painting, in particular the claiming of the painting as the body, and painting as being an act of ‘writing the body’. Lee’s work employed repeated decorative elements such as bows and ribbons on a brushstroke ground. 

!Sherrie Levine.

American conceptual artist who became extremely successful in the 1980s and influenced a generation of younger artists with her postmodern appropriation works. Levine’s primary interest is in the status of the work of art and of the reproduction. In this interest makes evident her interest in the work of Marcel Duchamp. Levine made a number of chequer board works painted on wood, a number of paintings in which she simply reproduced a cartoon character in outline (such as Charlie Brown), a number of black and white photographs by famous photographers, and of a marble torso sculpture which she signed, declaring the work to be then authenticated by her and therefore made by her. She made some works using wooden ply in which she utilised the oval insert of ply that fills the hole where there was a knot, as part of the image. Some works using gold leaf dealt with another interest of hers in the perceived versus the intrinsic value of a work of art. Levine’s work is almost exclusively small, no bigger than eighty cm high. Levine’s work essentially borrows the work of other artists, which she either remade (as she did in a number of drawings and watercolours after certain artists, which are then signed and authenticated as by her), or transferred from one art form to the status of work of art. Through appropriation Levine made fakery, plagiarism and false authentication into the subject of her work. 

!Simon Linke.

British artist born around 1960 who became known in the late 1980s for his post modern conceptual painting. Linke reproduced advertisements from art magazines on small canvases about sixty cm high, painting the text very accurately but using thick impasto. He chose to reproduce mostly advertisements printed in black and white, the paintings appearing from a distance to be exactly what they represent. The texture and application of the paint is what makes them paintings, reducing painting to its fundamentals. These works became iconographic, and were seen to represent a particular moment in conceptual art when artists engaged with issues of reproduction, the condition of reality and the status of the subject. Following this work in the late 1990s Linke began to work with text for its own sake, making the paintings in the same way but not reproducing anything. 

!Nicholas May.

A British painter born 1962, May made a series of large paintings by pouring large pools of house paint, while the canvas was on the floor, and tipping them to manoeuvre the paint and allowing them to dry. He often used different colours together, pouring one into the other, wet on wet, including metallic colours and powders, the resulting slick of paint forming the painting. May made a number of these during the 1990s, after which he ceased to make art. 

!Len McComb.

British artist born around 1940. Len McComb mainly makes large scale pencil drawings, for example a sequence of cliff faces on the Anglesey coastline drawn on a number of pieces of paper tiled together to make a wall sized drawing. 

!Humphrey Ocean.

British artist who makes semi abstract paintings. 

!Therese Oulton.

British artist who became known in the 1980s for her thickly encrusted dark coloured semi abstract paintings. 

!Sydney Nolan.

Australian twentieth century painter who is well known for painting the outlaw Ned Kelly, who he represented with a black square for a head. 

!Richard Prince.

Prince is an American artist who took developed the legacy of pop art, from the 1970s onwards to make a variety of types of work. He is most usually associated with two particular works: the Marlboro add and the joke paintings. These illustrate Prince’s prime interest in generic forms. The Marlboro work is a reproduced advertisement for Marlboro cigarettes with the cowboy on the horse removed so that remains is still instantly recognisable because of the brand name, and the type of landscape. It is a while before the viewer realises that the cowboy is not there, since the image is so familiar and this is what they expect to see, revealing clearly how embedded in visual memory the advertisement is. Prince has made joke paintings throughout his career, very simple text paintings telling a joke on a plain coloured canvas in a san serif typeface. The colours, typefaces and size of painting varies up to four metres high. The jokes are mostly quite funny. Prince has also made a large number of paintings using photographic screen printing mixed with painting, and abstract pattern paintings. His prolific output is distinguished by its variety, but also by consistency within that variety. 

!Arnulf Rainer.

German painter ! Paula Rego. British artist who since the 1980s has made semi autobiographical narrative figurative paintings. Rego has a direct style of drawing, and paints loosely but boldly using a generally subdued palette. She often adapts scenes from her own childhood to represent collective rites of passage, or taboo subjects such as incest. Little girls feature in many of her paintings, often with a man wearing military dress, a father figure. Rego is interested in the psychology of her chosen subjects as well as representing an era. 

!Gerhard Richter.

One of the most important twentieth century German artists, Richter made paintings in a variety of style and on a range of subjects but is best known for his exploration of the relation of painting to photography through his execution of 'the blur'. He is highly skilled at making photo realist paintings, which form a large part of his work. Richter’s colour photo realist works include one of his most popular works, a portrait of his daughter seen from behind, wearing a red floral print top with her blonde hair tied back. This painting is made very realistic and the paint is smoothed soft so that there are no visible brushstrokes, emulating a photographs even in its physical surface. He made similar paintings of a lighted candle and a baby. A number of monochrome paintings of blocks of flats are given a more exaggerated blur, as are his numerous black and white paintings. These include one of a chandelier, many landscapes and some trees. Richter made two notable groups of painted photo portraits, all in the same format, one of the Baader Meinhof Gang and the other of German industrialists. These are painted as direct copies from their source, including any text that was attached to the photo and the white edge of the photo. Most of the photo based works are smallish, around one metre high or less. A series of views of mountains are made to look like colour by numbers paintings, as if the image has been reduced to the essentials of light and dark. Richter made some colour chart works, which are immaculately painted multi coloured shiny rectangles of colour within a white grid. Taking the blur to its physical extreme his later work is a series of abstract paintings done with a giant squeegee dragged across the width of the canvas, spreading the various colours of paint into each other in one sweep. Richter wrote a book called The Daily Practise of Painting. 

!David Salle.

One of the best known postmodernist painters, Salle’s paintings during the 1980s defined the term for painting of that period. Salle borrowed elements and styles from paintings from any period in history and mixed them all up on the canvas. His paintings are very large. 

!Julian Schnabel.

Schnabel is an American artist known for the very large paintings (at least four metres high) made in the 1980s onto which he stuck broken crockery, mainly white dinner plates. Schnabel has always worked on a large scale and in 2000 he made a ten metre high painting, painted on the floor, which had footmarks on it. 

!Mira Schor.

American artist who makes abstract paintings that have feminist and psychoanalytic theoretical concerns. Schor’s paintings often contain a painted slit or vaginal motif. 

!Adrian Searle.

British painter and critic who made small abstract paintings until the mid 1990s when he gave up painting to concentrate on writing about art. 

!Philippe Taaffe.

American painter who first became successful in the 1980s with his large three metre high paintings using repeating patterns based on printed and woven fabric designs and geometric abstract drawings. Taaffe’s work exhibits a combination of precision, in the drawing of the pattern, and painterliness, in the application of paint over the whole and uses strong colours, for example yellow with black. 

!Mo Throp.

British painter born in around 1950. 

!Tom of Finland.

Pencil drawings of gay men variously dressed in leather, naked, sometimes in a state of sexual arousal often couples or threesomes, but sometimes alone. They are realistic and detailed, made in the style of the drawings that used to be found in barbershop windows to illustrate hairstyles. Tom of Finland's drawings document specific pleasures and codes of dress in a straightforward manner, but for all their sexually explicit subject matter they have a strange ambiguity in terms of their purpose. 

!Amikam Toren.

British artist born around 1950 who makes works from found paintings onto which he stencils words, cutting out the letters to leave the wall behind the canvas visible. 

!Kyffin Williams.

British artist born in the 1930s who spent his life painting the welsh landscape. Williams’ impressionistic work is made with a very thick impasto, mostly paint applied with a palette knife to create a loose gestural interpretation using bright colours as well as a natural earth palette. The paintings are rarely more than one metre high. 

!Sue Williams.

American painter born around 1960 who makes figurative painting. Her best known work is from the 1980s when she was known as one of a group of women artists described as Bad Girls for their strongly feminist, aggressive and angry work. Pro Porn and Anti Porn, a painting from this period, shows a little girl's prone under a kneeling man seen from the rear, his erect penis and scrotum in full view. There are other similarly explicit drawings on canvas with text. The outline drawings in the paintings are done in black of grey on a coloured grounds. 

!Paul Winstanley.

British artist who makes paintings of shadows cast by window frames, in which the structural elements of roofs, usually in black and white, are softened, the image becoming abstract. By the 1990s digital technology and video had become commonplace. Artists were increasingly working across a range of media, and were not necessarily confined to their studios. Research based practises led artist to engage with institutions and with social groups. Telecommunications and cheap travel made it possible for young artists to have international careers. The art market grew. The number of practising artists increased dramatically. Painting, which had been said to have suffered a dip in popularity in the 1980s, became fashionable again. Artists no longer sought to demonstrate the theoretical concerns underlying their practise. The early part of the decade saw the emergence of so called 'dumbing down', art made as a reaction against the high production and intellectual values of 1980s art. 

!Faisal Abdul’allah.

In 2003 Abdul’allah made an installation that invites the viewer to enter a large box like structure, people with light coloured eyes entering to the left, those with dark eyes to the right. Once segregated by a genetic characteristic, the viewers find themselves in one of two spaces. One is a small room with highly polished metallic floor walls and ceiling in a copper coloured metal that functions like a mirror and creates a glowing light. On the floor is an inscribed text that addresses the viewer personally and asks them to consider their feelings on arrival in this space. The other space, which is the larger remainder of the box like structure, is pitch black. On entry it can be seen that the small room projects into this space, and is in fact constructed from a material that allows one way vision. From the dark space the viewers in the small space can be seen clearly. Although this would seem like a privileged space due to the materials of its construction, the people in it seem to be imprisoned, regarded secretly by the watchers in the larger space. 

!Tomma Abts.

German painter born around 1970 who paints small abstract geometric works using very specific and carefully chosen combinations of colours and shapes. The surfaces of the works show traces of intensive reworking and over brushing, evidence of the time taken to make the paintings. 

!Reverend Ethan Acres.

Ordained clergyman from California who also works as an artist, making live works that combine a religious service with performance, usually involving a sermon, and other performers. 

!Add N to X.

A partnership of two musicians, both born in the 1970s, who made video works in the late 1990s and early 2000s, on example is a continually changing colour grid was controlled by the soundtrack which accompanied it. 

!Shahin Affrassiabi.

A British artist born in 1960, Affrassiabi’s conceptual installations employ household items and materials to make formal sculptural constructions which reference other works of art. 

!Doug Aitken.

American film and installation artist born in 1975. Aitken first worked in commercials and used the experience gained in this field to make a series of multi screen and projected video installations. Diamond Sea featured a deserted mining town in Namibia, which is not marked on state maps to ensure that its location remains secret. A sense of the people who worked there is evoked (and their exploitation implied). Aitken makes his own soundtracks, which form an integral part of the installations, sometimes several films are shown at once resulting in a blend of soundtracks. Another work, a film of the audience attending a travelling cinema in India, was screened in a tented room with sand on the floor. Aitken’s work deals with location and presence, with a sense of place being a priority. 

!Philip Akkerman.

Akkerman makes a self portrait every day of his life, each one in a different style. The paintings are about fifty cm high. 

!Philip Allen.

Allen is a British painter born 1970s whose almost abstract paintings of the early 2000s mark a change from his previous representational work. The paintings have a roughly painted background and a multicoloured scallop motif on top, referencing landscape and abstract painting. 

!Darren Almond.

Almond, a British artist born in the 1970s, is interested in time. He made a large clock of the type that has the 24 hour time display in figures that flip over. It shows the time going very fast so that a minute is a second and an hour is reached in a minute, and is to be mounted in a public institution or railway station. He also made a large aeroplane propeller painted white and mounted it horizontally on the floor of a gallery so that its blades nearly touch the walls leaving just enough room for a person to pass. He set up a live video link between a gallery and an empty prison cell, permitting the viewer a fly on the wall visit to a prison cell. Almond also made a video titled Ghost Train, which is filmed in black and white in a ghost train at a fairground somewhere in Austria. Shot from one of the cars, the film is grainy and visually lyrical as the low light conditions of the video affect what can be seen dramatically. The sound of the train and the sound effects of the ride are edited with a musical soundtrack. Another work is a replica of a bus shelter from a town where near a Nazi concentration camp. 

!Kai Althoff.

Artist born around 1960 who makes bright water colour paintings on paper. 

!Francis Alys.

Born in the 1950s, Alys is a Brazilian artist who made a series of works in the early 1990s by commissioning a sign painter to paint a sign, which he then placed in his studio and made a painting of the scene including the sign. 

!Janine Antoni.

American artist born in the late 1970s who has made a series of performance works and installations. Chocolate Gnaw and Lard Gnaw involved the artist chewing as much chocolate as she could from a one metre cube and melting the resulting chocolate to make chocolate pieces. The lard chewed from a similar sized block was made into lipsticks and the residual blocks are displayed as part of the work. She also cast busts of herself from the chewings. The chocolate and lipstick products were displayed in luxurious packaging in a mirrored and gilt edged display case of the kind that might be seen in a department store. She thereby made a connection between the basic act of chewing and eating, female relationships to food and body image (fat and chocolate) and cosmetics, and the role of packaging in the stimulation of desire. In ‘Harmony Hair Colour’ she used her long dark hair as a brush to make paintings with hair dye on large pieces of paper on the floor, referencing Yves Klein’s blue paintings made using women’s bodies as brushes. ‘Sleep’ was an installation in which Antoni slept at night, wired up to a machine which recorded her REM patterns. She transferred the resulting line on the graph drawn by the machine on a continuous sheet of paper onto a specially constructed wooden loom in the same room and wove on it a white fabric with the sleep patterns as a blue line. The resulting fabric length was as long as the sleep graph, defined by the number of days Antoni slept in the gallery. Antoni made the fabric into a nightgown. 

!Reza Aramesh.

A British Iranian artist born in the 1960s who works in mixed media, made paintings of the branches of trees, and installations with furniture, wallpaper and real stuffed animals. 

!Liz Arnold.

British artist born 1963 who painted women and anthropomorphised cats, very often with flowers, inhabiting story book universes, in strong colours with lots of black in a neat way. Arnold’s creatures inhabit the real world in an unreal way and often seem to be undertaking serious but mysterious business. They are fashionably dressed and wear jewellery and have long eyelashes. In one painting cats are wearing lab coats and there is a fiction atmosphere. Arnold died in 2002. 

!Conrad Atkinson.

British artist. 

!Attila.

Russian figurative painter, born in 1960s who is one of the few Russian artists to be commercially successful in the west during the early 1990s. 

!Fabienne Audeoud.

French artist born in the 1960s, Audeoud’s work is often derived from her interest in classical music, for example a video works shows Audeoud as a diva singing to the point of collapse, and in another she appears as a fading diva on a self destructive binge in her bedroom. There is a spare and often painful quality to these works, which are both abject and comical. For one project Audeoud set herself the task of unlearning everything she knew about playing the piano which took many months. Like many of her works, this was a daily practise. She filmed a brass band rehearsing, whose discordance is at odds with their calm appearance. She has also made several collaborative painting exhibitions with former Bank artist John Russell. These are room sized narrative figurative paintings, quickly and badly made, with text added. 

!Donald Baechler.



!Alex Bag.

American artist who worked in video in the 1990s and made a video about being an art student. 

!Stefan Balkenhol.

German artist who carves large figures from whole tree trunks that are often over three metres high. The figures are carved roughly and all the chisel marks are visible with no attempt being made to smooth the surface of the wood and they are then painted. Balkenhol has made site specific work such as the six metre high figures he placed on wooden piles in the river Thames in London. His carvings depict contemporary people whilst referring both to folk art and to historical polychromed sculpture. 

!Bank.

British collaborative artists John Russell, Millie Thompson and Simon Bedwell, born in the 1960s, worked as Bank in the 1990s until Russell left in 2001. Thompson and Bedwell continued to work as Bank until 2003. Bank produced a large body of painting, sculpture, printed matter and texts as well as curating several seminal group exhibitions. They directed their attentions at the art world making ironic and satirical work underpinned by a detailed knowledge of and love for art history, a sense of humour and a disrespect for the establishment (which could be seen as Bank’s trademark). Bank’s painting spanned a range of styles including highly realistic still life featuring the detritus of their studio done in old master style, ‘bad’ figurative painting, ‘serious’ abstraction, and self portraits. They explored the world of painting as iconoclasts. Most of Bank’s exhibitions were accompanied by a printed text in the form of a polemic on the state of art, of the world and of artists. Bank Newspaper was self published for ten years, featuring news about the art world, drawings and photographs on a tabloid model. Irreverent and downright rude, those (especially their targets) who failed to get the joke found nothing in Bank’s work for them. In 2000 Bank published their ongoing fax back series as a book. For several years they had been returning press releases to the gallery that sent them, edited, corrected and with suggestions. These served to highlight the pomposity, inaccuracy, bad grammar and inflated claims made about artist by their dealers to hilarious effect. Bank also curated exhibitions the first of which was in a bank giving the group their name. But most were held in Bank’s studio in London’s East End. Other shows were titled Gallerie Poo Poo and Cocaine Orgasm which featured a life size self portrait sculpture of the group members on crucifixes. In 2003 Thompson and Bedwell posed semi naked for a series of photos dressed as classical figures from paintings but using their untidy studio as a background and anything to hand as costumes and props. 

!Fiona Banner.

Banner is a British artist born in 1965 who uses text as her material, first becoming known for a work called ‘The Hunt for Red October’ in which she wrote out the entire synopsis of the film of that name by watching it. She typeset this text and printed it, two metres high on paper in landscape format. The text represented the entire film but was not possible to read due to the line length. The viewer is forced to read vertically, skipping from line to line, producing their own unique reading of the text. Banner followed this with several similar film synopsis works, culminating in The Nam, a huge paperback book which contains her synopsis of the film Apocalypse Now. She also made an audio recording of herself reading this synopsis, which is produced in a flat vocal style. Banner’s work has most often referenced film, the book and the printed page, but she has also made work about songs and music, including a Bob Dylan song produced as a large work on canvas. The words of the song are spelt out in large stencil style letters on unprimed canvases three metres high, then cut out so that the canvas is mostly gone. The song stretches over several canvases. Since 2000 Banner has made several sculptural works, three dimensional versions of punctuation marks which are carved from polystyrenes and painted or cast in bronze. She has also made a number of works dealing with pornography, including some in which she removed all the text from a narrative leaving only the punctuation. 

!Guy Bar Amotz.

Bar Amotz is an Israeli artist born in the 1970s who lives in London. His work deals with sound and music in the form of sculptures that often incorporate speakers made from household objects, or especially made fibreglass structures which house audio and computer equipment which have a futuristic appearance. He made a giant karaoke machine which can entered by the viewer and an amplifier which is worn as a backpack housed in a rigid fibreglass lacquered shell. Bar Amotz sometimes uses metallic car spray to finish his sculptures. In 2003 he made a machine to be worn by a dancer whose movements triggered various sensors so that the movement created the music. 

!Sally Barker.

Barker made a performance work in the early 1990s for which she assumed an alter ego; Tela, a goddess or warrior queen. Barker performed as the goddess sitting on a throne, with acolytes, dressed in a cross between Roman and Viking costume with gold sprayed greaves, wristbands and a helmet. 

!Matthew Barney.

An American artist born in 1960s, Barney’s prolific work includes video, film, and sculpture. He made a performance work in 1993 with called Drawing Restraint in which he was tethered to the back wall of a squash court with a rubber bungee and used his own strength to get himself to the opposite wall, leaving marks on it to gradually make a drawing. He also scaled a lift shaft in a multi storey car park naked, using climbing equipment, with a surgical implement or machine tool inserted in his anus. These performances were documented on video. They are followed by a series of sculptures made from solid petroleum jelly. This is known both as a medicinal aid and a lubricant with sexual associations, and Barney used it to cast ambiguous sculptures that resembled gym equipment, rendered very realistically and shown in refrigerated spaces. Petroleum jelly became a significant element of Barney’s work. Barney made a series of five feature length films called Cremaster I – V, shot in 35 mm to commercial cinema standards, but made by a tiny crew and with the exception of the final film on a shoestring budget. The series explores a surreal world of symbolism, perversion, fetishism and onanism. The five films are conceived as a whole and were made over a period of 10 years. One of the films is set on an American football pitch. There is a long sequence of synchronised marching shot from above on a crane and from pitch level, featuring women dressed as glamorous grown up cheerleaders moving in tightly choreographed formation. They begin at the edges of the pitch and gradually form the shape of one of the Cremaster logos, a kind of jewelled harp. Another is filmed on a frozen lake on which a kind of snow fort has been constructed. Cremaster Four is filmed on the Isle of Man and takes the Manx symbol of the three legs of man and the annual TT motorbike race as its main subject. Barney’s character is a kind of fawn with red furry legs and pointed ears, and there is a goblin and a peasant girl and her parents. There are other exotic creatures all of which have strange mutant genitalia (a consistent theme in Barney's work). Four is filmed on Giants’ Causeway and is based on the Celtic myth in which a pebble is thrown into the sea and becomes an island. Another of the Cremaster series takes place both in the Guggenheim Museum in New York and in the interior of an airship with stewardesses in very chic uniforms seated round a table with a large display of grapes. One of the stewardesses is under the table on a small shelf curled round the pedestal of the table. She clings on precariously, while trying to and succeeding in making a hole in the table cloth above, using hairpins, and then gradually pulling grapes through. The grapes are red and white. She eats the grapes. This is intercut with animated film of grapes in lines forming various symbols. In the Guggenheim Barney, dressed as a Scottish piper in full ceremonial dress, slowly ascends the outside walls of the huge spiral stairway using climbing ropes and shackles. On each level different people and groups are encountered, for example a long line of can dancing women who place one extended leg on the edge of the balcony for Barney to crawl under, an extremely beautiful woman, and a small child. There is a section of the film which takes place in an empty warehouse and lots of water, Norman Mailer and Ursula Andress in a black jewelled outfit. Cremaster Five is shot in a bath house in Budapest, and features an opera singer. The last in the series to be made, Cremaster Three, is shot entirely on a set and features the Chrysler building in New York. The film opens with a long sequenced involving a hermaphroditic almost dead person recently disinterred from a living grave being deposited in a black sedan in the centre of a hexagonal room which also contains a crow. The arena is eventually recognised as an empty floor high up in the Chrysler building, and the corpse to be Gary Gilmore. As the viewer imagines the crow to be pecking out the eyes of the corpse, five large apparently driverless cars emerge from the corners of the space and begin a kind of ballet, repeatedly hitting and gradually crushing the black sedan until it is no more. A bar is staffed by a stereotypical Irish comedic barman who pours Guinness and becomes overwhelmed by foam. Barney’s character is a construction worker on the building. He is a young handsome Irish character who has some mysterious secrets, revealed when he visits two ‘doctors’ in a room in the building who reveal under his tattered clothes (including a leather apron with Masonic items in the pocket) his mutant genitalia. He excretes a petroleum jelly ‘turd’ which immediately mutates. As the top of the building is constructed the man is involved in a kind of wedding at the pinnacle, under a floral arch with ribbons which are finally unfurled and thrown over the side of the building to float down until they are caught by the workmen and drawn in through the windows. This is carefully choreographed to create a spiral of ribbons on the exterior of the skyscraper as if it were a giant maypole. One the pair who is married has their head crushed by falling steel. The mutant genitalia, gym equipment, logos and symbols of all the films relate to the title of the sequence, Cremaster. The Cremaster is a muscle is located somewhere between the scrotum and the anus, it is significant in both sexual performance and procreation, but most people are unaware of it. Barney treats the muscle as if it were one that could be worked, and as a metaphor for his own ideas about creativity and the individual. 

!Massimo Bartolini.

Italian artist born second half of the twentieth century. 

!David Batchelor.

British artist born in 1950s who uses coloured acrylic sheet to make strange utilitarian low trolleys in a multitude of colours which are then arranged to make an installation, or stacked to make a tower of coloured light. 

!Lolly Batty.

British artist born in the 1960s who made a series of abstract sculptures of three dimensional polyhedrons, carved in polystyrene and painted look smooth and heavy as if they had been carved in plaster. They have the appearance of one metre high geometric snow flakes smooth, clean and white. 

!Breda Beban.

UK performance artist born 1950s. 

!Vanessa Beecroft.

American performance artist Beecroft uses professional models to make her room sized installations, chosen for their perfect bodies and dressed alike, usually in underwear or naked but always wearing shoes and make up and usually wigs. In one early work they are wearing yellow bobbed wigs and items of school uniforms, whilst in a more recent work they have natural hair but identical face and body makeup giving them an ethereal gleam, and high heels. The models stand, sit or lie, however they feel comfortable, for the duration of the work usually four hours, and may engage the viewer's eye or not as they choose. They do not speak. Although the viewer is free to wander among them, no one does because the experience is intimidating. It is Beecroft's intention to show supposedly objectified naked beautiful bodies of women rendered very powerful simply by their presentation and context. The control of the situation is given to women by their very muteness, their make up and their beauty, traditionally seen as means of oppression. 

!Tony Benn.

British figurative conceptual painter born late 1950s. 

!Bik Van der Pol.

Dutch artist partners who make collaborative sociological investigations, setting up forums for investigation into contemporary art practises and in particular encouraging and facilitating cross nationality projects and interaction. 

!Richard Billingham.

British photographer born around 1960 who has made a series of photographs of his own family which reveal a chronically alcoholic father who is either comatose or the life and soul, and an overweight mother who likes to laugh. The pair watch a lot of television, drink, smoke and play with their other children and their dog. Their house is very untidy. The photographs are graphic and show Billingham's parents asleep, happy, sad, playful, and drunk. The degree of intimacy permitted to the viewer is startling, asking the viewer to reconsider their preconceptions. The photographs are all taken in the house with ambient light. To get the image he wants, Billingham often places the camera low down or high up, using any angle necessary to get a certain part of the room or a certain number of people. Billingham followed the photographs with a film, made in the same way, which reveals that his father is evidently going to die of a smoking related disease, and that the younger brother is very good at speaking on camera. Billingham’s work is characterised by its combination of casualness and thoughtfulness. It could not have been made by anyone other than a family member, as it otherwise would have been intrusive and vicarious. Equally it could only have been made at a time when the convention of fly on the wall documentary had been established and a fascination for the minutiae of ordinary lives become commonplace. 

!Olaf Bjornsdottir.

Scandinavian artist. 

!Katrin Bohm.

German artist born in 1970s who made social environments as gallery installations. Bohm designed a colour coordinated social space, with various printed paper items, paper cups and pens to match. She placed literature, questionnaires and other printed material in the space. 

!Nick Bolton.

British artist born in the 1960s who has made installation and video work. A telephone box with etched glass has a sensor attached to the mouthpiece so that when someone speaks on the phone, the light in the phone box becomes brighter or dimmer related to the pitch of the speakers voice. 

!Christine Borland.

Scottish artist born around 1970 who made a number of works featuring hand guns, presenting a police blanket with a bullet hole in it and a caravan in a gallery, containing some evidence of a crime or the suggestion that a crime could be committed, with a handgun lying on a table. Borland’s work displays an interest in how material evidence can be represented as an art work and in how that visual evidence can be used by the viewer to construct a narrative. 

!Philippe Bradshaw.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes large scale installations often using chain curtains. These have photographic imagery on them and are made by a commercial technique using different coloured links to make the image. An installation in a darkened room contained several of these curtains, some with photographs on, one with a nineteenth century landscape on, another with a Franz Hals painting on, placed around the space in the centre of which was a trampoline. Video monitors displayed a montage of imagery and also a film of Bradshaw jumping on the trampoline naked, which had been performed as part of the installation. The effect was that of multiple images, hard to grasp (the chain curtain images are hard to see at close quarters) and disorientating, but visually rich. 

!Stan Brakhage.

Late twentieth century Canadian film maker, Brakhage has made a large body of video work. He is interested in visual narrative and its disruption. One work consists of a fictional tale performed by actors of the infidelity of a modern sea captain’s wife, shown as one projection but which in fact consists of several plot lines woven together, leading the viewer to make choices about the direction of the narrative. Another work takes twenty four hours to view. A film set in a deserted house, shot in the dark by the light of one torch, is presented on a freestanding screen so that the viewer must walk around it. 

!Candice Brietz.

Artist born in 1970s. 

!Cecily Brown.

British artist born in the 1970s who paints very large splashy, dribbly and apparently messy works with tightly controlled colour choices. At first glance these appear to be abstract expressionistic paintings but almost immediately they reveal themselves to be figurative, for hidden in the mass of brush marks and paint splashes is a meticulously constructed figure, or figures often in pornographic poses. The works set up an expectation for the viewer and then almost immediately confound it, also making an analogy between abstract expressionism and sexual gratification. 

!Glenn Brown.

Brown is known for his excessively meticulous paintings that reproduce exactly other works of art, or more accurately that reproduce reproductions of other works of art. Brown scales up a reproduction, chosen from among many, all of which are different in colour due to the printing processes. He then paints this reproduction faithfully in oil paint, using the tiniest of brushes, reproducing not only what the work depicts but also the actual brushstrokes, giving the painting a trompe l’oeil quality. In fact it is debatable whether Browns paintings are copies or trompe l’oeil since they do seduce the viewer into thinking that their surface is thick paint textured when in fact it is flat and smooth. This is particularly evident in a series of de Kooning copies, where the thickly encrusted paint is entirely realistic. However on closer inspection the ‘impasto’ has a plasticised quality. Brown's de Kooning series culminated in a number of painted ‘lumps’ – apparently lumps of paint palette scrapings like those de Kooning reputedly had in his studio, but actually bronze casts painted by Brown to give the illusion of paint scrapings. Brown subsequently copied Fragonard's Boy in a Hat, and girl on a swing, which he showed upside down, and a number of science fiction paintings by Chris Foss, which were the subject of a legal copyright action. Brown's work deals with reproduction and its importance in the dissemination of the images, questioning whether what people know best is the image itself or its reproduction, and questioning the importance of the hand of the artist. His main idea is to make painting the subject of itself. 

!Angela Bulloch.

British artist born in the late 1960s. Bulloch's sculptures and installations deal with the social structures of society, the rules by which we live and the deconstruction of art and image making. Bulloch’s 1990s works include a mudslinging machine which created a mud spatter ‘painting’ on the wall, a drawing machine which drew a blue spattered line along a wall. These machines were viewer activated in some way. Often a piece of furniture designed by the artist would trigger the machines to work if sat on. The machines would be presented in an environment which invited contemplation, the artist filling a space with bean bags made to her design, often large enough to seat groups of people. The bean bags symbolised communality, and were a striking alternative to the customary formality of art galleries. Bulloch was one of a number of artists in the 90s who were explored the relationship of the viewer to art but more particularly to the institutional context in which they found it. She questioned the normalising structures by which we live by presenting such structures in new ways. Her Rules works are an example of this – presenting rules designed for specific purposes as if they are general rules to live by, rules that may be written in a small book are put on a wall using transfer lettering, giving them a perverse authority In early 2000s Bulloch made some small sculptures from chewed gum which she then cast and painted. She continued her series of works made from pixel boxes, her own invention which consists of a wooden box with one opaque acrylic face, inside which is a light source with the capacity to change colour infinitely. This is linked to a computer, which is able to control the change of light colours, using as its instructions of the changes the pixels in a video image, or a piece of music. Bulloch stacks the pixel boxes vertically in a variety of formations and also horizontally to create the effect of an illuminated dance floor and minimal abstract sculpture. In the latter case the pixels were controlled by sound. Bulloch often works with sound, and in 2003 she made a number of small sculptural objects, smooth amorphous shapes sprayed with white lacquer, which on handling revealed an inbuilt and incongruous means of generating sound, perhaps in response to light levels for example. ] ! Tom Burr. American artist working in the 1990s onwards. 

!Jane Bustin.

British painter born 1960s who makes severe abstract works that are both investigations into the effect of colour and pigment, surface and also into votive painting and the painting as symbolic or spiritual object of contemplation. Bustin uses natural colours, dark reds, blues, black white. There is never a figurative element in her paintings, merely subtle shifts in tone that may hint at a form. 

!Caivano Varda.

Still life painter working in the early 2000s. 

!Ingrid Calame.

Calame's apparently abstract paintings are in fact taken from the outlines of stains she finds on the street and in public places. She photographs the ground, draws the outlines of the stains, then paints the canvas in subtle colours to create an abstract image from something very mundane and ephemeral. 

!John Callan.

British sculptor born in 1960s who pushed paint through pin pricks following the lines on pages of text in an open book to create painted text. Callan also built a small house or dog kennel out of bricks and mortar. 

!Ellen Cantor.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes video and drawings. 

!Janet Cardiff and Georges Bures Miller.

Canadian artist and musician/sound engineer partner working from the 1990s onwards. Cardiff made a work for the Whitechapel Library in London which took the viewer on a walking tour – the viewer was given a personal CD player which directed their steps and used sound to interpret and accompany what they were seeing. She made a gallery installation with a choir in which the choir members, performing a medieval choral work, were recorded individually, and then played through individual speakers placed on speaker stands at ear height in a circle in the gallery. Thus the viewer could choose how to experience the work by where they stand, and hear each voice individually. This gave a sense of what it is like to be part of a choir, and also a sense of the physical space which a choir occupies and how that space is experienced aurally. The gallery space is also articulated by where the sound is coming from – this varies according to whether the whole choir is singing, or just the sopranos in one segment of the circle, or a few of each type of voice dotted round the circle. The work gives the non participant a participatory experience and inverts the performer listener relationship. 

!Gillian Carnegie.

British artist born in the late 1960s who began her career in the 1990s. Carnegie makes paintings in two distinct ways. She paints her own and other female bodies nearly always the back view, mainly featuring the buttocks in a realist way using muted lifelike colours. These paintings are small, about forty cm high. She also paints landscapes in extremely thick impasto, the canvases ranging from forty cm to 150 cm high. These landscapes are usually woodland scenes, sometimes with lakes, rarely featuring people. The paint is sometimes squeezed straight from the tube so that close up the image is nearly impossible to read, in particular in the paintings which are predominantly one colour, often black or very dark colours, as if it were night. In these paintings the image is revealed by the sheen on the squeezes and smears of the paint, the texture and the shadows created. In other landscapes more typical colours are used, blues, browns and greens, but in all the landscapes the vegetation is rendered in detail, as is the bark of trees and the ripples on water. There is a sinister atmosphere in the images, although they appear timeless there is somehow the implication of a contemporary narrative. Similarly with the nudes, although a traditional subject, the fact that they are often self portraits coupled with her obsession with bottoms, gives a contemporary twist to the sexual projection of these images and hints at both onanism and voyeurism. Carnegie subsequently began to paint floral still lifes, using a much lighter palette although still restrained. In these the background and any vessels holding the flowers are painted smoothly and the flowers are rendered in her style of thick impasto and squeezings, a few judiciously placed ones making them very convincing as flowers. Carnegie's paintings make an investigation into the history of painting styles and subject matters, subverting traditional subject matter by making anachronistic and unexpected juxtaposition of style and content. 

!Melanie Carvahlo.

British artist who is interested in how people conceptualise their world. In a work from 2002 she invited a large number of people from all walks of life to make a painting of ‘home’. She displayed the resulting works in a gallery as part of an installation. Carvahlo also makes complex photo collages that include people, buildings and brightly coloured exotic flowers and sunsets. 

!Maurizio Cattelan.

Sculptor and installation artist who uses stuffed animals in his work. Cattalan hung a dead stuffed horse from the ceiling in a sling, made to look as if it were either dead or tranquillised. He made an effigy of the pope toppling to the floor felled by a meteorite. A table football game for two teams of eleven to play simultaneously. A squirrel slumped at a tiny table with a gun indicating that it had committed suicide. A small boy wearing a hooded sweatshirt sitting at a school desk who has speared a pencil through his hand. Cattelan’s work is often intended to be disturbing and provocative. A large format photograph of the back of the Hollywood sign reversed so that it reads the right way, apparently installed in a mountainous area, it is unclear whether a huge deconstruction was undertaken to make the photograph or whether it is digitally created. 

!Brian Dawn Chalkley.

British artist born 1950s, Chalkley is a transvestite who works as both a man and a woman. He uses video and photography to investigate identity, for example in a film in which Dawn is seen in various dangerous scenarios, alone in isolated places having possibly been attacked. 

!Jake and Dinos Chapman.

British artists born in mid 1960s the Chapmans are brothers who work together. They became known in 1993 for Disasters of War, a sculpture that recreated Goya’s disasters of war as a 1:100 scale model. This grisly scene was presented on a plinth the size of a table top, realistically made and leaving nothing to the imagination. Flayed corpses hang from trees, severed limbs are strewn about, headless torsos are propped up, heads stuck on bayonets. They later made a series of etchings based on this work in homage to the original. Another early work was Little Death Machine, a working machine built in model scale and presented in a vitrine on a plinth. It was a rubber model of a brain that functioned as a pump to spurt out white liquid. On one hand the Chapmans' work is deeply rooted in art history, politics and subversion with implied criticism of Western capitalism and of the failure of art to deal with important issues. On the other hand the artists delight in the puerile and a childish humour and set out to deliberately and defiantly shock. It is the Chapmans' life size sculptures of mutant children that are most notorious in this regard. These children, which are adapted from shop window mannequins, are made in what has become their main medium of cast fibreglass with realistically airbrushed skin and features. They have genitalia on their face and smooth skin where their genitals should be. A girl might have a vagina as a mouth, or several orifices on her body where none would usually be. A boy may have a penis as a nose. The children are posed in apparently compromising positions and situated in a beautiful garden. There are trees and plants with large fantasy flowers and grass made from a material that resembles a scaled up version of the green sand like material used as grass by model makers and model railway enthusiasts. in this work, as in all their work The Chapmans have taken a basic human urge, such as the urge to kill, the sexual urge and its many perversions, and urge to power and represented it in order to confront their viewer with the possibility of discovering such urges in themselves. In this sense their work is highly politicised. The artists subsequently created The Disasters of War as a life size work. The Chapmans made a porn film featuring people with mutant prosthetic genitalia attached to their bodies. They continued to make etchings and other works on paper, and to make large scale installations and models. Their McDonald’s Concentration camp, made in 2000, is a very large 1:50 model of a fictitious concentration camp, which has McDonald's logos. The camp processes people, and the viewer can see tiny figures being brought in, living in squalor, being killed and ‘processed’ in various ways. Much of what the model depicts is familiar to us not through experience but through fictitious depiction on film and television and the model relies on this to animate it. The work makes a literal analogy between a fast food company bringing cheap food to the masses with no concern for their detrimental and social impact, and the Nazis. They have also made larger scale sculptures again in their usual medium of cast fibreglass, realistically painted with an airbrush, which represents a kind of gothic heavy metal concentration camp monument with massed skulls, very black and dark. In 2003 the Chapmans' presented a darkened room apparently full of African tribal art, painted wood carvings which have added grass, beads and teeth. The room is like a museum, darkened to lend a familiar reverence to the sculptures set on plinths. There is a deadened acoustic. On closer inspection the viewer can see that the carvings all in some way feature the MacDonald’s logo, the golden M, or represent a burger or Ronald McDonald the company’s clown mascot. These are cleverly worked as ‘African’ looking sculpture, Ronald McDonald a totemic figure, the burger often the mouth of a figure, the M appearing as a decorative element. 

!Lali Chetwynd.

Artist working in London, Chetwynd made several performance works in the late 1900s and early 2000s. 

!Lisa Cheung.

Korean artist born in the 1970s who makes photographic works often shown as slide projections. 

!Andrew Child.

British artist born in the 1960s. 

!Billy Childish.

British artist, poet and musician born around 1960. Childish has made a large number of naïve figurative paintings often of himself and his friends on found wooden boards, the sides of boxes, and other unconventional materials. He is known equally for his poetry which includes, and makes a virtue of, his dyslexic spelling errors, and for the punk band which he fronts, Thee Headcoats. Although he has worked in this way since the early 1980s, in the late 90s Childish achieved a notoriety beyond his cult following when he was immortalised by ex girlfriend Tracy Emin in several works, including her embroidered tent ‘Everybody I Have Ever Slept With’. Since then Childish formed the Stuckists, a self proclaimed movement that promotes the idea that British art in particular the work of the artists that make up so called Brit Art, is simply ‘stuck’. The Stuckists set out to critique it, by means of pamphleteering, demonstrating, fly postering and other public protestation and interventions. 

!John Chilver.

Born in the 1960s the British painter Chilver has made paint itself the subject of his conceptual paintings. He uses paint squeezed or piped in the way icing would be to decorate a cake, through a square nozzle, to produce a three dimensional line on the canvas. He also adds paint from a traditional round nozzle. The paintings depict simple scenes, for example a fence with a bird on it. Or a style with a clump of grass. The fence or style will be piped in square lines often black or dark grey, the bird in many colours of thinner round lines, the whole giving the impression of casualness and speed of execution when in fact the reverse is obviously the case. Chilver often uses puns in his title, for example 'style' and 'stile'. He investigates the nature of painting the painted mark, without actually painting at all since the backgrounds are entirely flat and the paint is never touched by a brush or worked at all. 

!Adam Chodzko.

British artist born 1960s. Looking for Jesus is a work made in the 1990s. Chodzko placed a classified advertisement requesting people who thought they looked like Jesus to send him passport photos. Often they bore no resemblance at all. Chodzko made a work with Afghan refugees living in Hastings in 1990 in which he asked them to sort through and select from the archive of Cubitt, an artist run organisation in London. The selection was placed in a watertight box and buried below the high water mark on the beach at Hastings. Another work from 2003 was site specific, Chodzko placed a billboard in a field in Texas on which it was printed the directions to a billboard outside a gallery in London, which again had printed the directions to the billboard in Texas. A kind of transatlantic endgame with the idea of encouraging a sense of place, geography, time and space. A photo of the American billboard was displayed at site of the British one and vice versa. Chodzko's work is usually socially engaged and often involves research, correspondence or mass participation. 

!Anne Collins.

American artist born in the 1970s who makes photographs, for example of women in urban and rural landscapes, with a precisely controlled banality. 

!Matt Collishaw.

British artist born in the 1960s who among other works has made a large format photograph of a bullet entrance hole in a person's scalp. 

!George Condo.

American artist born around 1960 who makes paintings that use art historical references, often nearly remaking a particular work but with his own often fantastic twists and distortions so as to create an entirely contemporary version of a painting from history. The paintings use a variety of styles and usually bright colours, and although they have a clearly historical reference they often have a science fiction or fantasy reference too. Condo also paints LP covers, turning them into large paintings around a metre high. 

!Melanie Counsel.

British artist born around 1960. 

!Keith Coventry.

British artist born in 1960s who paints white on white paintings that reproduce famous paintings in oil paint without colour. 

!Martin Creed.

Scottish artist born around 1960 who makes sculpture and installation from almost nothing. All his work is assigned a number and a description for the title, for example, A Door Opening and Shutting, The Lights Going On and off, One A4 Sheet of Paper Screwed Into a Ball. Further works include a cube made of layers of elastoplast, a cube made of layers of masking tape cubes, a bulging protrusion from the wall of a room which is plastered and painted to be as part of the wall. Creed's work is sometimes active, for example one which consists of a room full of white balloons through which the viewer must push their way. This references Yves Klein’s ‘Void’, and empty gallery space. The door that opens and shuts is operated by a door closer on a timed switch. The lights going on and off is similar. This work has also been ‘performed’ by Creeds. band Owada – whenever the lights came on the band played, whenever they went off the band stopped, as if the electricity supply for the amplifiers were linked to the lights. Or the other way around. Owada which can be described as making minimal conceptual music gained success as an art band in the late 90s and early 2000s with tracks such as One to A Hundred, which featured Creed speaking these numbers in order and the band playing rising scales one note per number. 

!Gregory Crewsdon.

American artist who makes photographs of staged events that appear to be crime scenes. There is something of the supernatural about the images, which have an unreality due to the highly controlled lighting and decisions made in the printing. A small town petrol station is seen from above at night and the disposition of people and vehicles seems strangely static, leading the viewer to guess at possibilities, perhaps to wonder whether there has been or is about to be an alien invasion. Another work might show a person looking at the sky, presaging some unknown possibly extra terrestrial event. The photographs are complex and ambitious in their construction of a subtly warped reality, shot on location rather than in a studio. 

!Russell Crotty.

American artist born around 1960 who makes obsessive biro drawings sometimes on large sheets of paper, also in very large books, at least eighty cm high. The drawings are made by colouring in with blue biro, using the pen for the purpose for which it is least suited, on a scale which is plainly absurd. 

!Juan Cruz.

British artist born in the mid 1960s who works with sound and text. Cruz made an installation performance in which he translated the text of Cervantes' great Spanish novel Don Quixote in real time over a number of days. He also made a work based on the Duende, an untranslatable Spanish word that describes the ‘feeling’ needed to perform flamenco. Cruz is chiefly interested in language and translation. 

!Shane Cullen.

Northern Irish artist who made a large scale text installation for which he printed or stencilled or used transfer lettering to inscribe the letters written to him during a correspondence he had with political prisoners on remand in the H block, a notorious prison in Northern Ireland. These covered the walls of the exhibition space. 

!Stewart Cumberland.

British painter born in the 1970s. 

!John Currin.

American painter born in 1962 who became extremely successful in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Currin made his name by painting women with unfeasibly enormous breasts, made in a mixture of kitsch and old master style. The women have exaggerated cartoon like features yet the colours used are entirely realistic, seeming to be there to hold the male gaze and fulfil male desire. They are however often painted in pairs, absorbed with each other, ignoring the viewer. Currin also paints portraits of real people, still lifes and interiors. His knowing and anarchic use of virtuoso painting techniques and undeniable skill in painting and drawing is allied with subject matter that would have been entirely unacceptable in the 1980s or early. 

!Brian Cyril Griffiths.

British artist born in the 1960s who has made a number of installations from cardboard, discarded materials, empty plastic containers and any number of banal materials. Griffiths’ space ship command module control panel made in 1997 was an adult sized version of a child’s dream. Griffiths has made many objects that seem like things that the viewer may think that they could make themselves but for the scale. In 2003 Griffiths made a hansom cab from a selection of second hand furniture, piecing specific parts together to make a three dimensional wooden collage. He also made a large striding warrior figure in the same way. 

!Dexter Dalwood.

British artist born in 1960 who makes figurative history paintings. Dalwood began his career painting expressionistic autobiographical narratives, often depicting himself and members of his family, particularly his father. He spent a year working in India and the influence of Indian miniatures is clear in his work of this period. Dalwood began to use the photograph as a source for his work around 1989, when his work became less narrative. He used images of multiple reflections in windows, grids and all over lattice patterns to create veil and screen effects in which appeared various motifs, for example a painted wooden toy bird. Dalwood also began to make groups of small paintings which were hung together. One such group depicted various personal histories, including paintings based on photographs of his father as a young man. His style of painting remained eclectic using a variety of textures, methods of application and thickness of paint. In 1995 Dalwood began a series of paintings of interiors which marked a change in his work. These mainly featured ceilings and light fittings, and are the only works of Dalwood’s that come close to abstraction. Dalwood began to paint fictitious interiors, making a collage from magazine cuttings and then replicating it on canvas, including the cut edges of the paper and differences in colour of sky, for example, taken from two different places. The interiors are imagined for a variety of well known people, such as Elvis’ Living Room, Bill Gates’ Bedroom, and also famous venues such as Studio 54 night club, Liberace’s Drawing Room. These collaged interiors function as portraits of a person but they began to include the work of other artists. Dalwood combined the work of an artist whom he connected in some way with the person he was making the painting about and added a part of their work to each composition by collaging. Mary Shelley is combined with Munch and Friedrich, Nixon with late Braque, Che Guevara with Piero della Francesca and Mao with Antonello da Messina. A painting of the greenhouse in which Kurt Cobain committed suicide has cherry blossoms from a Van Gogh painting. In this way Dalwood has made a series of portraits of famous people from a variety of walks of life. In 2000 he began to make the connection with history painting more explicit by making paintings that referred to a date rather than a person. Dalwood’s paintings are between one and four metres high and he uses a range of techniques according to the artist to whom he is making reference. 

!Adam Dant.

British artist born in the 1970s who makes wry satirical cartoon style drawings about art, artists, and the art world. Dant’s project is serious and comprehensive in its ambition to comment upon everything that happens but to make sure that art doesn't take itself too seriously. He began by making a weekly self published pamphlet, much in the vein of eighteen century pamphleteers soapbox speakers. The pamphlet was hand drawn and written by a pseudonymous character invented by Dant to represent himself (who was often shown in the drawings). It was a bit like a diary and featured topical news about art and advice written in mock serious style. It was photocopied and folded into a pocket sized booklet which Dant himself distributed wherever he went free of charge. He did this every week for several years, and it was the long term nature of the project that made it successful. Dant constructed a portable booth from which to distribute the pamphlet and became a presence at art fairs and museum exhibitions. By a simple weekly action Dant produced a major work. 

!Ian Davenport.

British artist born in the 1960s who began to make the drip paintings for which he became known in the 1990s. Davenport poured liquid paint onto a canvas from the top, allowing gravity to take the drip to the bottom of the canvas in a perfectly vertical line. He continued in this way across the width of the canvas using different colours until he had achieved a striped painting made without a single brushstroke, or any touch of the artist’s hand. At first sight the stripes would appear to have been painted with a brush perhaps even using masking tape, but on closer inspection tiny irregularities in the pour and the quality of the edge of the stripes made it obvious how the painting was made. Sometimes the paintings were in sombre colours, other times they were rainbow striped. Later Davenport developed various ways of making the pouring easier (fixing the paint pot to a runner for example) and he was able to make bigger canvases and even to pour directly onto a wall. Davenport also made paintings by pouring a coating of one colour of paint onto a canvas placed horizontally, and then adding in a stripe, a line, and arc in a contrasting colour by pouring directly into the wet surface. The two colours when dry formed a perfect flat shiny surface, in the way that the technique of enamelling can be used to combine colours. 

!Enrico David.

British Italian artist born in early 1960s who made a series of very large embroideries mounted on stretchers in the late 1990s. These were taken from collages and drawings he made from fashion magazines depicting women in fetish wear, extremely stylised clothes, very exaggerated bodies, very high heels, masks, drawn in a geometric style often with a 1920s or 30s feel. Although the images were of women they depict a non specific sexuality, the women often have large masculine bodies and may seem more like cross dressed men. David used woollen thread to fill in the figures with satin stitch, and due to the scale of the image (often two metres high or more), the stitches sometimes needed to be over a metre in length. Sometimes the stitches represented rays of light, too, or in one case silver thread was used on a blue canvas to represent the tight binding on the body of a model. David uses any craft materials or fabric that he likes to create these creatures. One has a butterfly entirely concealing her face, like a mask. Another is like an African queen. They are decadent and often sexual images, their handcraft materials at odds with the subject matter. He also made items of furniture and lamps. David began to work on some photo collages in 2000, using photos of himself wearing coloured paper constructions – red and blue, black and white, something like the costumes designed by the dada artists for Cabaret Voltaire. Other collages used images from magazines and often the background paper was cut in a certain way so that the found image could be raised from the background. He used brooches and other found jewellery and began to use carpentry, furniture making and decorative arts materials. In 2000 David began to draw men. A man in evening dress appears before the closed curtain of a theatre in a drawing in back and white that looks very much like a woodcut. A sculpture of a male figure is made of plywood coloured with wood stain; the profile of the figure is cut twice from sheets of ply and slotted together at right angles to each other. Turned wooden knobs are added to represent testicles. A large rag doll three metres high is made of canvas, stuffed, and embroidered with facial and bodily features and decorative patterns, and presented sagged against a plywood cabinet and lying on the floor. A gallery door is replaced by an etched glass and metal door that has an art nouveau style. A very long plywood screen covers the length of a gallery wall, on it a repeating interlinked pattern of a stylised male figure that has a 1930s look is made by incising the wood and using wood stain to create a kind of faux marquetry. A giant leather medal hangs on the wall. David was briefly a member of Donatella a group of artists and musicians who produced music videos and CDs, and made work in collaboration with fashion designers Eley Kishimoto for catwalk shows. 

!Peter Davies.

British artist born around 1970 who began his career making paintings consisting of many coloured dots on a white background on huge three or four metre wide canvases, creating patterns of waves, like an abstract pointillism. Davies always uses acrylic paint applied as flat solid colour. He went on to make text paintings in the later 1990s. For example The Hot 100 is a numbered list drawn up as a table in two columns with the lines painted in white, of the artists personal hundred favourite artists, painted in white on a multicoloured ground, a different colour for each line of text. The list functions as an illustration of subjectivity presented as a formally considered abstract painting. Davies subsequently made a diagram painting describing twentieth century art in terms of interlinked artists and movements. The text is painted in white on coloured elliptical or circular shapes to fit each name or title, which are linked or cross linked by coloured lines, the whole on a white background. Davies then began to make a series of very large pattern paintings at least four metres wide. The paintings are abstract three dimensional patterns that cover the picture plane and create a surface pattern, some painted in bright colours, some in monochrome, a bit like geometric doodles that play with simple perspective and convex and concave illusion. Like the text paintings these are painted in flat acrylic paint, with hard edges to the colours painted by hand rather than masked. Some of them allude vaguely to Robert Delaunay’s paintings and to 1930s textile patterns, others to futuristic cityscapes. 

!Peter Davis.

British artist ! Verne Dawson. American artist whose paintings depict an apparent utopia, a kind of modern pastoral world, with tiny people on the scale of the people in a Bosch painting populating rural and woodland scenes. 

!Angela De la Cruz.

British artist who makes sculptures from collapsed and destroyed paintings. De la Cruz's method is to construct a canvas which may be any size (from tiny to the largest which was a large scale installation of a canvas about fifteen metres squared). She paints the canvas in a plain colour, and then destroys it by breaking the stretcher and then twisting the whole into a heap. This is then fixed and either displayed on the wall or the floor. These deceptively humble objects assume the presence of a sculptural object, thus a painting is transformed. 

!Richard Deacon.

British artist Deacon began making very large sculptures in the 1980s at a time when sculpture was at a zenith of popularity. Deacon and his contemporaries Bill Woodrow and Grenville Davey made abstract works largely from cheap easily available materials. Deacon used reclaimed wood which he cut into strips, plied and glued and bolted together to make large hollow snail shell like structures, which he later began to design on a computer. The nature of the materials belied the complexity of the shape and the effort required in their construction. The means of construction were very evident, for example glue spilled over from the joins where they had been compressed. What would usually be hidden or on the inside of such a large work, was actually the surface of the work. 

!Tacita Dean.

British artist born in 1960s who uses 35 mm film to make installations and simple projections. One film is made inside a lighthouse. A series of photographs examines the beached yacht of a sailor, Donald Crowhurst who faked a transatlantic voyage. She made a number of drawings of film story boards featuring a ship in a stormy sea on blackboards. 

!Jeremy Deller.

British artist born in the late 1960s who is interested in different social groups and how they are creative. The authorship of Deller's work is always in question (an essential part of Deller’s work) – the creative work is as much the participants’ as it is Deller’s, who acts as the facilitator of an idea. In the mid 1990s Deller began working with groups of people brought together by a particular shared passion. One of the first of these was his Manic Street Preachers project. Deller asked young fans of the band to write and draw their feelings about them and their music. The resulting document was collected into a book and is a testament to the power of music to represent the feelings and hopes of a generation. Deller subsequently drew a chart linking acid house music with brass band music via many other forms of popular music. The chart was hand drawn in white on black with circles containing text linked and cross linked by arrows. Acid Brass was a project in which Deller commissioned a brass band to play acid house music. The resulting hybrid was performed in concerts halls and galleries, and released as a CD. Deller’s most ambitious work, Battle of Orgreave, was a full scale re enactment of a battle fought between the police and striking miners at the peak of the miners strike in the early 1980s in Britain in which the police charged the miners on horses. Deller arranged for several historical re enactment societies to come together to stage a full scale re enactment of this event. The re enacted battle was filmed by director Mike Figgis and intercut with original news footage. The resulting film, shown on national television, was a very accurate portrayal of what happened that also revealed the lengths to which the governments went to ensure a media cover up of the brutality of the police and their determination that the scale of the protest should be played down. Guest list was a work made for Imprint 93 an artist pamphlet series published by Matthew Higgs, which reproduced the guest list for an exhibition opening at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London. The list which featured a number of celebrities revealed a degree of social ambition and perhaps sycophancy on the part of the institution. The Folk museum was made by Deller with Alan Kane. Together they collected hand made craft and folk objects of no intrinsic value and displayed them as if they were valuable collection of artefacts. At the Venice Biennale in 2003 Deller made button badges with a road stop sign (a red circle with diagonal line bisecting it on a white ground) with the words No Vogue across it, which referred to the magazine – Deller commented of the ubiquity of the magazine’s presence at any art event, and the ever increasing tendency of the art world to collide with the world of socialites and celebrities and be photographed doing so. 

!Thomas Demand.

British artist who makes photographs of complex paper ‘sets’ that he constructs himself. The sets replicate a real space, for example an office, which Demand then remakes entirely in card and paper. The resulting construction is carefully lit and then photographed in large format and presented as a very large (about two metres high) print. The image provokes a double take – it seems to be a plausible space although oddly empty. Once the viewer begins to try to decode the image, and look for clues, it becomes apparent that for example the surfaces of the furniture are too homogenous, without detail. Even then it is difficult to establish why the space depicted seems unreal. When the process behind the work becomes clear the work can be viewed more as an achievement in terms of its construction. 

!Xenia Dieroff.

German artist living and working in Britain, Dieroff has made photographic work. A slide installation projected onto a hospital screen uses silhouetted figures and clever dissolves to create the illusion of a patient undressing that morphs into a striptease. 

!Mark Dion.

American artist who is interested in anthropology, material culture, ecology and natural history. Dion's usually large scale multi part installations are the result of research projects into specific locations or subjects. For example in London he searched an area of the muddy Thames riverbank above and below the timeline with the painstaking care of an archaeological dig. The resulting ‘artefacts’ or trash was cleaned up and exhibited in a number of vitrines and display cases in the Tate Gallery. 

!Rineke Djikstra.

A Dutch artist who became known in the late 1990s for her photographic portraits of young people. Like Thomas Struth and Thomas Ruff Djikstra asked her subjects to look straight at the lens and not to smile. The resulting images are a true document of a generation. In 2000 she began to make video portraits. A film portraying young people at a club shows them standing against a white backdrop, moving slightly. They are listening to music which the viewer cannot hear, but Djikstra has asked them to stand still. Their body language reveals a lot about them, as do their clothes. Although it is a film, the participants have been captured in time as if it were a photographic portrait. Their youth is very expressive. 

!Willie Docherty.

Northern Irish artist, Docherty made a number of photographic series and video works in the 1980s and early 90s at the height of the troubles in Northern Ireland. These featured empty roads, empty landscapes, cars and checkpoints. A video work in his Turner prize nomination exhibition was filmed from a car driver point of view and purported to be a night drive with sinister intentions, although this was merely suggested with the greatest economy of means. Docherty's work has an oneric quality although it deals with political issues. He gives a glimpse of life on the border and of political strife in urban and rural landscapes. 

!Peter Doig.

British painter who grew up in Canada, born 1957. Doig is chiefly a landscape painter and was among those British artists who created a resurgence of interest in painting in Britain in the early 1990s. His landscapes are often oneric, usually populated by a single figure if at all and have a strong sense of the unknown and of adventure. Doig paints the seasons, the mountains, forests, lakes, vernacular architecture, and occasionally sports such as fishing, skiing, snowboarding. He paints thinly and loosely, scattering the surface with blobs of thicker paint when the image is complete. This often serves to represent light, for example the white blobs in an early work The Architect's House. He also painted a Corbusier housing block in a similar way. Both are seen through trees and use a lot of green brown, back and white with touches of yellow white and red. Often the touches of paint on the surface do not read as part of the image but become very apparent on close inspection. They may even be bars of colour that are not part of the image at all, or splatters. Another early work, the Bean Eater, shows a boy walking in a field empty except for a red wooden house or barn. A leafless branch of a tree with some kind of seed or flower painted like glowing orangey white bobbles. Later works from 2000 onwards depict a steamboat apparently steaming past a jungle on a river reminiscent of (apocalypse). This is a very green and lush painting. A tree in the moonlight with a girl sitting on a branch high up is painted in greys and lilacs, as if it were a night scene or a nightmare. A lake with a canoe on it paddled by a man with long black hair and a beard, the canoe is orange and the lake very blue. This image is taken from an album cover. A painting of a mountain ski slope called Red Ski Jacket is very white with only the minute people bringing in colour. One of a snow boarder shows the boy in the air upside down at the top of the canvas with a group of people watching at the bottom. Doig became extremely influential in the mid 1990s. 

!Kay Donachie.

British artist born in 1970s who made process paintings during the 1990s, using a roller to transfer an image to a prepared canvas, resulting in a shadowy painting, the image always seeming slightly removed from reality due to the technique. Donachie painted isolated houses, a tent, a Christmas tree, the interior of Paul Klee's studio. She uses a monochrome palette, choosing a predominant colour for a painting. The transfer technique brings the concept of the photographic print into the painting although no such process is involved. The viewer’s uncertainty about how the image is made is paralleled by the uncertain status of the subject of the painting. Following this Donachie began to paint figures, for example groups of young women, and although not necessarily using the same technique, she gives the image the same once removed quality that places it in an uncertain time. Lighter colours begin to appear. Donachie's paintings are small, mostly under a metre squared. 

!Fiona Drummond.

British artist born 1962 who takes portrait photographs and still lifes. She often uses flowers and references seventeenth century Dutch painting especially in terms of light, using studio set and lighting, also paints dogs and flowers. 

!Dubossarsky and Vinogradov.

Russian painters born in the 1970s who paint collaboratively. Dubossarsky and Vinogradov are among the few Russian artists to gain commercial success in the America and Europe. Their work alludes to both history painting and to Russian Socialist Realist art. They often ask other artists to paint parts of the work for them and they may make several versions of the same painting or small versions of sections of larger works, for example a book on a snowy muddy ground with a frog diving into a hole. 

!Keith Edmier.

American artist born in the 1960s who makes resin cast sculptures of plants and flowers from scaled up models of a plant, such as a water lily up to four metres high, in pale pink or yellow resin. The sculpture has very realistic detail and despite its size looks very fragile. Edmier has used a variety of plants in this way, and sometimes makes very small sculptures. 

!Volker Eichmann.

German artist born in the late 1970s who makes photo collages using interior design magazines and strips of text. 

!Olafur Eliasson.

Norwegian artist who is interested in the effect of the environment, both built and natural, on humans and the reciprocal effect of humans. Eliasson makes minimal and sometimes barely visible interventions, as in his installation at Museum of Modern Art in New York. This consists of frosted transparent tape applied in vertical stripes, covering the whole glass curtain wall in the foyer, subtly but substantially altering the visitor's experience of this public area. Eliasson has also coloured the water in a harbour bright green, and in 2003 he made a work called the weather project for Tate Modern in London which consisted of a thirty meter diameter semi circular yellow panel representing the sun, hung at the top of the museums entrance hall, with a ceiling panelled with silver mirror fabric to create a reflection of the sun as if it were in water. A theatrical mist made of sugar and water is fed into the hall. Viewers lie on the floor to watch their reflections and to look at the sun. 

!Tracy Emin.

British artist who was at the forefront of the Brit Art group that came to prominence in the 1990s in London. Emin was born in the 1960s in Margate, a British seaside town which features prominently in her work. Emin's work is essentially a diary of her life, reflecting on her state of mind particularly in relation to her love life and her emotional life. Emin relates experiences that mostly remain personal, such as her abortion, her rape, her breakdown, drunken and regretted sex, good sex, the break up of relationships, her problems with alcohol and her feelings about her absent father. These are represented in a wide variety of media: video, drawings, mono prints, text, neon signs, textiles, embroidery, and installation. Emin’s consistent poetry and diary writing underpins her work. Her video works include ‘Why I never became a dancer’ made in the early 1990s shows Emin dancing in Margate. In 2000 Emin made a video in which she appears (achieved with editing) twice, as both good Tracy and bad Tracey, sitting together and chatting on a couch. The two dress differently and behave differently, both are likeable in different ways, one is drinking a cup of tea and the other a glass of wine throughout what seems to be an interview of some sort, or perhaps a therapy session. Emin achieved notoriety when she embroidered and appliquéd the inside of an ordinary one person tent with the names of all the people she had ever slept with. This was quite a long list of mostly men including several male artists, but also siblings and women friends who she had shared a bed with. In order to view the work the viewer had to crawl into the very small tent (which had only room for two), and recline, since there was no room to stand, in intimate proximity with both Emin’s work and the other occupant of the tent. Emin also embroidered an upholstered chair and made a series of appliquéd and embroidered quilts. The quilts bear text legends of life and love and art, for example ‘I need art like I need god’ and patterns, and are made using patterned and plain fabric and basic embroidery stitches onto bedspreads and blankets. The quilts were usually dated. Emin had a number of works made in neon, either from her writings or her poetry. The neon letters either a single sentence or a verse, often in pink, were mounted on the gallery wall. Emin consistently made drawings and mono prints, often accompanied by descriptive sentences or titles as part of the image. These are often explicit, showing her menstruating, lying in a drunken heap, happy and in love, masturbating. They are very simply drawn in a childish hand in pen, pencil or a blue or black ink for the mono prints, that belies their effectiveness. In the mid 1990s Emin opened a shop with another artist, Sarah Lucas, selling trinkets, souvenirs and t shirts all of which were made by the artists, for example an ashtray with a picture of Damien Hirst's head (which has since become a collectors item). When the shop closed Emin established the Tracey Emin Museum, essentially a live work space which she kept open to the public regularly each week and sold work from. Her insistence on non exclusivity as manifested by the shop and the museum, coupled with her appropriation of ‘anyone can do it’ craft methods and materials captured the zeitgeist of the time, and contributed to a surge in public interest in contemporary art. Before this was seen as elitist and even if this interest was often prurient, Emin was ultimately persuasive. She also took up many of the areas of investigation of women artist in the 1970s and updated them and has been extremely influential to a whole generation of artists, especially women. The work that crowned Emin’s reputation (for notoriety or otherwise) was My Bed, exhibited in the 2000 Turner Prize exhibition in London’s Tate gallery. This is the bed in which Emin spent many days during her breakdown, drinking, smoking, eating, having sex. The bed and the surrounding detritus, empty bottles, food plates, glasses, pill packets, dirty clothes including underwear, overflowing ashtrays, a soiled tampon, books and magazines, was exhibited on a plinth to great public outcry. Since 2000 Emin has continued to make works on paper and also to make more sculpture, including a rickety wooden tower which can be climbed, and a stuffed bird on a plinth. Birds have been a part of her personal iconography throughout her career. 

!Pepe Espaliu.

South American artist born in the 1960s who made a piece of work with a large quantity of old clothes, involving him cycling round the trunk of a tree on a platform that encircled the trunk just below the canopy. 

!Jonathan Faier.

German artist who made a video with Johannes Rust and one other artist in which they put together a large number of clips from news footage and advertisements featuring corporate logos. They edited it and added an ironic and humorous soundtrack to represent their appropriated material as a fast paced and amusing look at global capitalism and consumerism. This video is an example of a way of working that emerged in the late 1990s as video editing technology became universally accessible so that anyone with a camcorder and a TV could edit video. 

!Angus Fairhurst.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes drawings and collages and digitally animated drawing videos. 

!Mark Fairnington.



!Simon Faithfull.

British artist who has made a number of installation and works for the web. 

!Keith Farquhar.

German artist who makes drawings in marker pen on found surfaces such as pieces of laminate. The drawings reference the graphics on the covers of 60s and 70s text books. 

!Vincent Fecteau.

Artist working in the 1990s onwards who makes sculptures from wood, sometimes painted, with strong references to modernism. 

!Rachel Feinstein.

American artist born in the 1960s who makes sculptures from particle board and other timber sheet material, polystyrene, paint and a variety of other media. The sheet material is cut into shapes and assembled as the framework of a sculpture. Sometimes it is spray painted. Feinstein's work has a theatrical feel to it, as if she were making a kind of prop or stage set. She made a number of works that looked like futuristic flowers. Later works are made only of painted board cut into shapes, often silhouettes of people. The sculptures are usually no more than two metres in height. 

!Peter Fend.

Artist born in the 1960s who made a film of himself jumping around with only a jumper and a pair of shoes on. 

!Fischli and Weiss.

Swiss artists born in the 1950s who work in partnership. Peter Fischli and David Weiss make installation, photographic and video art. They are interested in nature, animals, cause and effect and the human condition. Early works consist of the artists dressed as animals filmed walking in the countryside, a series of realistic replica interiors for example a store room, the artists’ studio in which every item and piece of furniture is modelled from clay and cast in rubber, in a variety of solid colours, producing a simultaneously convincing and perplexing version of reality. Fischli and Weiss made a number of photographic works in which they created art works with food. For example, Still Life with Cold Meats shows an arrangement of sliced sausage, frankfurters and gherkins. Photographic work is always part of their practise, most usually presented as a slide projection or light box. Indeed much of Fischli and Weiss’s video work is very static and closer to photography. A slide projection featuring hundreds of images of flowers, shown grouped into seasons, each slide dissolving into the next so that a complex double image is created, takes about an hour to view. It has a mesmerising effect. An illuminated table, about fifteen meters long and one metre wide is used to display hundreds of images of land and city scapes, each one about six cm wide. At first off putting, this work also draws the viewer in as they try to make connections between the images and inadvertently construct their own narrative. Video work is often similarly open ended, as in one installation of about twelve monitors placed in a room, all showing different images of landscape, but not simultaneously so that some screens were blue while others are playing. The viewer is directed to move about the room by the monitors’ apparently random showings. Fischli and Weiss’s best known static video work is Pussy, a single shot film of a black and white cat drinking milk from a saucer. This was made to be projected on a huge LED screen above Times Square in New York, where it achieved a monumental quality. Perhaps their best known video is The Way Things Go, a film of the progression of a series of inanimate objects caused to move by a cause and effect chain of events. Using simple science, physics and common sense, and materials such as wood, metal, a variety of vessels, balls, weights, fire, steam, salt, batteries, and ice, the artists made a series of structures, balances, ramps, slopes, water channels, tubes, pipes and levers that are set in motion be each other over a period of about half and hour. Basic principles of physics utilising steam for expansion, melting, burning, balancing, rocking, tipping and velocity. This is for example used to propel water down a slope into a bucket which tips filling a tank with something floating on the surface which when it reaches a ball cock pushes a weight down on a platform which sets a ball rolling and so on. This piece is filmed in an empty warehouse space. Fischli and Weiss often make questions part of their work, as if they are involved in some kind of research. The question with which they are most often associated is ‘Are Animals People?’ At the Venice biennale in 2003 they presented a work in which they simply projected a series of questions on a wall in enormous letters, one of which was ‘Will Happiness Find Me?’ ! Ceal Floyer. British artist born in the 1960s who has made many works using light as her main medium. However Floyer's earliest works are a pair of brass door fingerplates with the inscriptions pushed and pulled on them, and a red dot of the kind galleries use to indicate that a work has been sold, which in reality was a hole in the wall filled with red pigment. Both are poetic interventions into the mundane, which also characterises Floyer’s whole body of work. A lot of Floyer’s early works are slide projections. Light switch, made in the early 1990s, is a slide projection of a photograph of an ordinary household light switch, projected onto a wall where a light switch might be. The projector is not concealed at all. The projection looks exactly like a real light switch prompting a double take, and the viewer, surprisingly, does not readily associate the projector with the image. Floyer achieved full suspension of disbelief by presenting something utterly ordinary in a magical way. Light Under The Door consisted of a projector placed in front of a door, projecting a strip of light the exact dimensions of the space under the door, at this space. The effect was of an incredibly strong light was coming from behind the door, enough to make the viewer want to investigate, when in fact the light source was readily visible at the viewers feet. In a similar vein, a photograph of an illuminated light bulb was projected on to a switched off light bulb, making it a light source in a new way. A light was projected down through a light bulb, projecting the text on the bulb (brand name and wattage) onto the ground below, again prompting a kind of double take since when this work is viewed it seems like something that should happen every time a light bulb is switched on. Floyer began to work with sound in the late 1990s, presenting a work in which the sound of a slide projector is recorded and pressed onto vinyl, which is played on a turntable on a plinth. The viewer looks for the slide projection, which is not there, and eventually associates what they are hearing with what they see. This slippage, between what is heard and seen, or what is seen and understood is Floyer’s main interest. Around the same time, she made a video of a dog just outside the frame, jumping into the frame regularly leaping for an invisible ball. Once again it takes a certain amount of watching to work out what is happening. An apparently abstract static image suddenly moves and turns out to be a white net curtain against a window which occasionally flaps in the breeze, and when it touches the window becomes more transparent. A piece of screwed up white paper, fluttering in an eddy of wind in an empty cul de sac, resembles, when the film is looped, a white butterfly forever fluttering in the same place. Floyer’s interest in light extended to an interest in all things white, and indeed she has not used colour at all unless the object she wishes to use is coloured. A till receipt is placed on the wall and seems to be nothing more than that, until the viewer realises that every object on the list is white in colour (milk, flour and lard for example). In 2003 Floyer made a work for a museum in London. She installed a bell ringing at regular intervals, a bit like the bell that summons an audience into an auditorium. This created a sense of expectation, and a feeling in the viewer that they ought to obey the abstract summons causing them to look for a direction and finally to look towards where they perceive the sound to be emanating from. This act of looking is what the artist wanted to achieve. Another sound work is a recording of a drip in a bucket, played on a cassette player placed in a bucket, causing the viewer to look to the ceiling or if not to think about the sound they are hearing as being generated by a drip coming from the ceiling which they know is not there. Floyer’s project has been to reveal the beauty in the nearly intangible. 

!Laura Ford.

British artist born in 1960s who made a number of installation works in the 1980s concerned with fairy tales and the imagination, including one performance featuring a person in a bear suit. In the 1990s Ford made a large installation of actual size stuffed toy children, made in chintz fabrics of different colours, in a range of poses. 

!John Frankland.

British artist born around 1960 who makes sculpture and installation. Frankland's early works were a series of site specific installations in which he used plastic sheeting, stretched over battens, to line the walls of a space. In such a way he created a second skin inner wall that appeared to be very solid and shiny but was in fact only a thin layer of cheap plastic. He did this in black plastic in a cellar, in silver grey plastic on a freestanding form that looked like a giant metal wall, and in gold metal along a wall in a gallery. In this last work, Lift, he arranged the battening and supports so that there was the illusion of minimal gold metal lift doors set into a gold wall, with a hemispherical convex form pushed out from the back of the plastic to represent the button for calling the lift the only detail. Following this, Frankland made a work in which he painted a section of a tree trunk in bright yellow high gloss paint, using so many layers that the details of the trunk are smoothed out, giving it a first impression look of a model tree trunk. The trunk is mounted on the wall at chest height defying its tremendous weight. There is a contradiction between the possible lightness of the trunk if it is a fibreglass cast, and the reality of the weight of the wood. Frankland later made a site specific work for a sculpture park which consisted of his selection of a one ton boulder from a quarry placed in a site of his choice. 

!Katharina Fritsch.

Artist working in the late 1990s and early 2000s. 

!Bernard Frize.

German artist who makes process paintings, using multiple clear and bright colours of thin paint in several distinct and apparently continuous brushstrokes, wet into wet, to create a simple repeated pattern. The means of execution of the painting is puzzling as it appears that it would be impossible for the brush strokes to be juxtaposed in the way that they are. 

!Anya Gallaccio.

British artist born in the 1960s who has made a number of installations since the 1990s. One of her first installations involved paining the walls of a gallery with chocolate. The colour was reminiscent of a dirty protest, the smell in contrast overpoweringly sweet. She also made a curtain to hang in a gallery window from dark orange gerbera flower heads strung on threads the height of the window. 

!Gang Chen.

Chinese artist born in the 1960s who makes paintings of luggage seen on airport x ray machines. 

!Vidya Gaston.

Artist working in partnership with another artist who has made work in the 1990s and 2000s consisting of woollen pompoms placed on Perspex boxes. The pompoms are made in the way that children make them, by threading wool around two circles of card with a hole in the middle and then cutting between the circles. They are made in a range of sizes and colours, usually muted, from about 2 cm to 60 cm in diameter. The plinths are various sized too. The two artists have made other kinds of work together. 

!Ana Genovese.

British sculptor born in the 1970s who make small scale models of large environments or tracts of land, for example deserts. A desert complete with an oasis is be modelled on a domestic scale. Genovese also makes fibreglass ‘puddles’. 

!Isa Genzken.

German artist who makes sculptural objects and collages, for example concrete forms reminiscent of building materials placed together to form rudimentary architectural structures of about three metres in height, or long wooden spear like forms four metres tapered at both ends. Other works include collections of metal cooking utensils, such as sieves, whisks, knives, colanders, graters and peelers, strung together with chains and hung in clusters on the wall. Presented in this way these banal domestic objects seem somehow sexual and perverse. Genzken also made a series of thirty cm square collages of nudes cut up and re joined to make strange human forms. In 2002 Genzken made a series of small sculptures that look like maquettes for skyscrapers, made from found materials such as fruit crates, cellophane, printed matter, cardboard and glass, and roughly formed with copious amounts of glue oozing from the joins. This work is about the re building of Berlin, the changing from a faded modernist architecture to the new skyscrapers ! Ori Gersht. Artist working in the 1990s and 2000s who took a panoramic photo of a London football stadium and presented it on 25 metre gallery wall ! Liam Gillick. British artist who born in around 1960 who works in a variety of media. Text is integral to Gillick's work both visually and because he has written a number of books which he also designs, for example Erasmus is Late (with a yellow cover, the title punched through in ticker tape lettering), and published texts which are part of his practise. In both texts and visual work he explores the legacy and iconography of modernism, in particular its architectural and graphic forms, and urban and social space. There is a strongly liberal political aspect to Gillick’s work. He often uses quotation relating to politically significant historical events (such as the English Civil War) in his work, an approach which ultimately gives Gillick’s work a didactic quality. For Gillick the design of printed material is of paramount importance, equal to the construction of his sculptural works. For example Gillick’s ‘Conversation Platforms’ are panels made from squares of apparently random coloured Perspex sheets set in an aluminium framework to make a grid. The panel is then hung above head height and the viewer will be standing under it. These works have expanded into more complex and architectural structures, featuring sections of wall as well as platforms, and even a huge suspended ceiling, always using different colours of Perspex. Gillick has also made a large number of works on paper, many of them proposals for graphic design projects or architectural designs for the facades of buildings. In addition to his ideas for transforming public spaces he makes proposals for social events, some of which are carried out, as for example when he scheduled a programme of yoga classes to take place in a gallery under and around his Perspex platforms. Gillick’s approach is ideological; part social scientist, part philosophical theorist, part artist, part liberal political. He presents a vision of the world which has clean lines, perfectly considered typographic style, well designed building, where history can be reconsidered and there is a lot to read. 

!Kersten Glass.

British artist born in the 1970s who paints images of female models from magazines, juxtaposed in the manner of a collage, with a text title running across. The women are painted realistically, and are fashionably dressed and made up often in punk and Goth style. The paintings echo 1980s design. 

!Margarita Gluzberg.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes very realistic detailed pencil drawings of women, about two metres high. 

!Robert Gober.

American artist born in the 1960s, Gober’s work consider the human body and landscape. He has made a series of works using wax casts of his body parts, for example legs and hands. These are realistically finished down to the last hair, and installed in odd ways, for example a leg and foot may project from the wall at a right angle. He has made many installations featuring body parts, for example a room papered with the artist’s own design of wall paper, a forest of trees with sinister things going on among them and leg sculptures sticking out of wall. Another theme is that of ‘orifices’. Gober will often make circular openings with metal facings and plugholes, highly finished but ambiguous in terms of position and function. It is as if the external world is seen as a metaphor for the human body, and the orifices in the world might lead to a mysterious interior which provokes both curiosity and repulsion. Everything Gober makes has a highly detailed finish and exactly specified materials. In the early 2000s he began to make huge scale installations, for example a large gallery space which is empty apart from a small grill in the floor. Looking through this grill it is possible to discern an apparently real river bed and pool stretching under the floor, creating the impression that the whole gallery floor is covering a piece of nature. Somewhere there is a figure of Christ. Gober also made a piece of work featuring a bridal dress. 

!Steven Gontarski.

American artist born in the 1970s who makes figurative sculptures. Gontarski began in the late 90s to make life size figures made from fabric sewn tighter in the style of a stuffed toy on top of an armature. The figures were distorted human forms made from shiny plastics and vinyl, elongated and featureless, their limbs often joining and intertwined. The combinations of fabric alluded to garments. Sometimes a part of a garment might be incorporated into the sculpture. The lumpy feet might have a stripe referring to, but looking nothing like a trainer. Gontarski's soft sculptures are dancers, made by combining modernist sculptural forms, for example Henry Moore, with elements from club wear. Along with the sculptures he made drawings on acetate, and later on Perspex sheet. These were simple outlines in fibre tip marker featuring people that he had met and odd lines from their conversation. In 2000 Gontarski began to make similar figures from cast fibreglass, finished in one colour of a high gloss lacquer often pearlescent or metallic. The figures began to take on a molten morphology, like a mixture of Rodin, Boccioni and the molten baddy in the film Terminator 2. The figures twist and dance, and are placed on plinths made of the same material and of a part with the sculpture. The plinths are sprayed with graffiti, by graffiti artists that Gontarski has invited. Gontarski also made a series of busts in a similar way. These refer to the generic bronze bust which one might see anywhere. In Gontarski’s smoothed out and rendered version, there might be a hole right through the face. One is a virgin Mary figure painted in white. 

!Douglas Gordon.

British artist born in the 1960s who works in a range of media, including photography, video and text. Gordon is fascinated with the visual representation of psychological states, particularly in film. He made an installation for which he covered the walls with a list of all the people he knows, their names applied in self adhesive lettering in columns. Gordon often uses this type of lettering. A small work appeared in a book consisting of a text about looking which ends by stating that by the time the reader has read the text, they will have been reading for 3 minutes. He makes a comparison between the time taken to read and the time taken to look at images. Gordon has made a number of video and film works. He often uses back projection onto freestanding or hanging screens in the gallery. One work shows a film from the thirties of two psychoanalysts talking to and subsequently restraining a hysterical female patient, finally pinning her down. The film is presented played forwards and backwards, resulting in very different interpretations on the viewers part. This deconstruction of found film led eventually to Gordon’s best known work, 24 Hour Psycho. The film of the same name is projected the gallery wall, slowed down so that it takes 24 hours to play from start to finish. The gallery remains open during this time. The Resulting film provokes all kinds of new readings, and the extreme slow motion renders the famous shower scene entirely different. Gordon has made many works on paper including a number of photographs of film stars with the eyes cut out or replaced with plain paper, and a number of photographs of apparent actions such as his black finger tattoo, a photograph of his finger which is entirely black. 

!Felix Gonzales Torres.

American artist born around 1960 who made sculptures and installations. Gonzales Torres died in the late 1990s. During his lifetime his father died as did many of his friends from AIDS related illness. His work is preoccupied with death. Gonzales Torres used a variety of media, usually with minimal intervention on his part. The work he did was in choosing his material, decisions about quantity and placement. For example he presented a simple stack of his own weight in sheets of newsprint. The weight of his dead father in ivory coloured sweets, is laid out in an amorphous shape on the floor, the sweets are the same colour as bone and the visitor is invited to take one away. A way of giving out the body of his father in an obvious parallel with the Transubstantiation. This is one of a series of candy works, using different colours of sweets arranged in different abstract shaped heaps on the floor according to the subject of the work (given in the title) always to be taken away so that the work changes through interaction. Another series of works are bead curtains, floor to ceiling, strung across the width of a gallery to bisect or divide it creating a new space, partially transparent, the beads are of certain specified colours. One work included a performative element. A Male dancer naked except for silver shorts and boots danced on a podium surrounded by lights. When the dancer wasn’t there the podium remained as the work, a plinth for an absent sculpture, the dancer, symbolic of death, the final curtain and the performance of life. Gonzales Torres also made a series of light bulb works, strings of standard light bulbs to be strung in specific locations, in a tree, a stairwell for example. He also made photographic works, the most well known of which is an empty bed with white sheets each of the pillows bearing the impressions left by a head. Another is a photograph of flowers growing in bare soil, which is titled The Grave of Gertrude Stein. Gonzales Torres’ work deals with death, the fleeting nature of life, and the idea of the memorial, by using the simplest sculptural forms. 

!Rodney Graham.

Canadian artist born in the 1950s who since the 1980s has made works in film, video, installation, photography and sound. Graham made a video showing himself as Robinson Crusoe lying beneath a palm tree sleeping until a coconut drops onto his head from the tree. He sits ups, rubs his eyes, tries to focus, feels dizzy and lies down only to have the same thing happen again, and in fact the film is a loop. This work portrays the endless loop of time lived out by Crusoe while stranded. Another film shows a house burning down. Graham made a sound work in which he took a segment of a piece of classical music which is not usually played when that piece is performed, analysed it and added it to make a playable loop. He then arranged for an orchestra to play it and had it recorded. Graham took a photograph of a tree in winter, and presented it upside down. The branches of the tree become the roots, and the roots the branches. On the theme of the inverted or retinal image Gordon also installed a pinhole camera in a horse drawn carriage, giving the viewer the opportunity to enter the carriage and view the scene outside through the camera upside down. 

!Gregory Green.

American artist born in the 1960s who makes installation and sculpture. In the early 1990s Green made an installation in a small room for which he constructed an imaginary IRA bomb factory from scratch by reading books and information freely available to the public. The process of bomb making is shown taking place in a small kitchen, the materials needed strewn everywhere, empty cups and ashtrays, food and food wrappers, plates the evidence of long hours of work taking place. The drain gin board contains canisters of weed killer and bags of sugar, the materials used to make explosives, and there are five litre plastic bottles with liquid undergoing some process of transformation. A table is crammed with electrical equipment and tools, mostly ordinary domestic materials such as light switches, plugs, fuses, wire, insulating tape, cable connectors. There is a bomb maker’s manual open on the table. The verisimilitude is such that the viewer cannot avoid the feeling that they are trespassing in a place where an illegal activity is taking place. The viewer feels jumpy, as if they might be discovered by the perpetrators who they feel might be dangerous. The effect of the installation is to show how close to daily life, how enmeshed in the everyday is the potential to kill. Green also made several bombs complete but lacking explosive and detonators. These attracted the attention of the tabloid press and in some cases the gallery that exhibited was forced to remove them. One was a suitcase bomb, one was even a nuclear device, complete except for the plutonium. Subsequently Green set up a pirate radio station and broadcast illegally to a free state that he had created. 

!Renee Green.

American artist born in the 1960s, Green is known for her large scale interactive installations which have a socio political genesis. In the late 1990s Green made an installation that filled a gallery with a maze like partition board structure consisting of a series of spaces, the walls painted in different colours, sometimes plain, sometimes striped. Viewers walked through the structure, choosing to stop where they wished. Videos are presented on monitors on the floor with bean bags and headphones strewn about. Written participation in a survey is invited. Photographs are on the walls. One space has sitting room furniture. One has a record collection and a record player. Overall the viewer enters a microcosmic world that represents daily life and is asked to consider and participate in activities that illustrate how identity is constructed and how it might be possible to think in new ways about its construction. 

!Johan Grimonprez.

Belgian artist who made a video work in the late 1990s D I A L History. This projected film consists of vast amount of excerpted footage from newsreels, film and television that concerns terrorism, specifically the hijacking of an aeroplane. Grimonprez has edited this footage to make a short film showing the history of hijacking and the imagery that we have of such events. 

!Lucy Gunning.

British artist born in the 1970s who made a video titled Climbing Round my Room (mid 1990s). Gunning negotiated the perimeter of her room without touching the floor, which involved climbing to the top of a wardrobe and balancing precariously on various items of furniture and using door handles and steps. The resulting video presented a re articulation of an ordinary domestic space. 

!Andreas Gursky.

Swiss photographer who takes pictures of banal scenes in which the minute is contrasted with the gigantic, creating a formal image which in some cases becomes almost abstract. Gursky heightens this effect by manipulating the image in the darkroom, often altering the perspective so that the image reads as a flat picture plane rather than a representation of perspective. There is usually a repetitive pattern created by the presence in the images of a mass of something, for example people or windows. These effects are subtle and subversive. Examples of Gursky's work from the 1990s include a container park at the port of Ferrara, where the bright colours of the containers form a patchwork pattern on the background of red soil and glowing pink light. The floor of a Siemens factory is a mainly white image in which the black lines for the production line furniture and the bright colours for the electrical cable supplies create a pattern. The Japanese stock exchange is a pattern in yellow and black with white added by the presence of cascading tickets and the striped jackets of the trader. An expanse of plain carpet seems to be vast, skiers on slope are sticks of colour in a white space, a race course in Japan can be read as horizontal bands of colour, the display case in a Prada shoe shop is alive with glowing jewelled colour, a shopping centre is presented as bands of brass and greenery as the escalator travel down through the main atrium, a vast apartment block is a pattern of squares, a canal and dyke are horizontal stripes ! Graham Gussin. British artist born 1960s who makes drawings and sometimes installations. Around 1999 Gussin made a sound sensitive floor that made sounds in response to the viewer’s footsteps, producing a re articulation of the viewer’s action in looking. Gussin made some drawings of the sound produced in this way using a computer programme that represented the sound waves as a perspective drawing. 

!Fabrice Gygi.

Swiss artist born in the 1960s who makes installations. These consist of structures in metal wood rubber and plastic, which apparently have practical function but in fact are difficult to decipher. The structures or groups of structures might fill a room. They have frames made from some kind of metal pole, put together using clamps and off the shelf heavy duty fixings. There might be a screen like structure, a bench like one, a platform. The frames might be filled in with plastic or rubber sheeting, hemmed and edged with large eyelets and then laced to the frame. A bench might have an upholstered top. The elements reference the gym and the club, which here seems to be an arena that implies sex and possibly violence. Yet they are benign mysterious objects that invite human interaction. 

!Matthew Hale.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes performance videos and assembled sculptures from household objects that hint at performative action. Hale was one of the founders of City Racing, an artist run gallery in London in the 1990s. 

!Siobhan Hapaska.

Irish artist born in 1965 who makes sculptures and installation. An early work was eight identical life casts of a clothed young man, painted in buff colour, bearing a coffin. Made in 1990s, this work seemed like a comment on the number of young men who were dying from AIDS related illnesses at that time. He has also made a vaguely heart shaped wall mounted ‘speaker’ constructed from teak veneer and purple felt, with a heartbeat sound playing from it. St Christopher Legless was included in a room sized installation featuring a fibreglass body cast or lifelike sculpture of the saint in rags and long black beard, sitting against the wall with amputated or cut off legs, an irony for this patron saint of travellers, or a cruel blow dealt to him deliberately. Echoes of kneecapping punishment in the conflict in Northern Ireland. There was also a fibreglass sculpture of a motorbike, whose contours and mechanics had been smoothed out and filled in so that the whole bike turned into a kind of futuristic vehicle. This was indeed reminiscent of the sculptures of Boccioni but also somehow of Rodin. It was sprayed in a pearlescent white and highly polished. Also a large bedlike structure, a futuristic sleeping platform made from shiny white lacquered fibreglass, the platform with ergonomic curved base, with a slit running all round the inset mattress area, from which water was pumped and ran over the sides of the base in a constant water curtain. The mattress of shaggy fur, with a harness and headphones suggesting that one could strap oneself in and be transported, not literally but mentally, by the comfort and the sound and the trickling water. The bed, like the motorbike, seemed to come from science fiction. 

!Mark Harris.

British artist born around 1960 who makes conceptual work. 

!David Harrison.

British artist born in the 1950s who makes autobiographical sculpture, paintings and drawings. Harrison’s work has a naïve quality, the paintings are small, around 60 cm high, and sometimes awkwardly painted. The drawings are made in pencil. In his early work in the 1980s Harrison concentrated almost exclusively on painting cats with a highly stylised 50s appearance. Later Harrison began to describe his own life and lives like his more literally in terms of encounters with people, animals and landscape. For example, several paintings feature a caravan in a rural setting, and include the name of a purported guest to the caravan in the title, for example British footballer Paul Gascoigne. In some of the caravan paintings a mysterious white rabbit hovers, ghost like, as if it represents the spirit of something. Harrison’s sculptures are assemblages of objects to resemble animals, in the spirit of Picasso. Forks, table legs and any kind of discarded objects are given new roles as the legs of a heron, a bird’s beak. The sculptures junk like appearance belies their accurate resemblance to the animal they represent. 

!Marcus Harvey.

Marcus Harvey is a British painter born in the 1970s who is interested in using paint and its application to produce a hidden image, or conversely to produce an image by an unusual means of application of paint. Harvey made a series of works in the 1990s, which on first inspection appear to be abstract paintings with lots of impasto and brushstrokes. In fact superimposed are outlines of women taken from pornographic images painted in thin black lines merging into the abstraction. Once recognised, however the images are very clear. In 1999 Harvey made a painting of Myra Hindley, a convicted child murderer still serving her sentence at the time, which became notorious. This painting became famous by the constant press interest in the story. Harvey made the ten metres high portrait, taken from the police mug shot, from the handprints of children. The handprints in varying shades from white to dark grey form a kind of pixel effect, creating and image that only appears in full detail from distance, much like the effect of a billboard poster. 

!Jun Hasewaga.

Korean artist working in Britain, born in the 1970s. Hasewaga makes paintings of people on board, in shiny gloss paint with solid outlines, and then cut out. 

!Thomas Helbig.

German artist born in the 1960s who makes paintings on hessian. 

!Matthew Higgs.

British curator and artist born in the early 60s who makes works on paper. Higgs’s dry witty conceptual work re presents book covers, pages from books and titles, making plays on words and puns. He will often make a text work in which a book, or a title is transformed by minimal intervention into a reference to the visual. One series of works involved obliterating all the words on a page except the words ‘There is a painting on the wall’ and placing this framed page next to a painting by another artist. Higgs also made an artists publication series called Imprint 93 (from 1993 onwards) for which he invited artist to make a small pamphlet. This activity bridges his practise as an artists and his work as a curator. 

!Roger Hiorns.



!Thomas Hirschhorn.

German artist born around 1960 who makes large scale environments and installations. Hirschorn’s work evolves from a life as art philosophy that leads him to create environments and make related publications. He uses found imagery, and all kinds of materials in his work, building large architectural structures in a homemade way from cardboard, silver foil, plastic bags, and any number of other found items and materials. 

!Damien Hirst.

British artist born in the early 1960s who became one of the best known contemporary artists in Britain when he exhibited a shark preserved in formaldehyde in a glass tank titled The Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living. Hirst is considered to have been the impetus fro a generation of British artists known as the Young British Artists (abbreviated to YBAs) because he curated an exhibition in an empty warehouse titled Freeze. This featured his contemporaries (they were all still students) at a time when it was nearly impossible for young artists to exhibit their work in London galleries. The term YBAs went on to become the collective name for all of Hirst’s generation, including Jake and Dinos Chapman, Tracy Emin, and Sarah Lucas. Hirst’s work was purchased by the London Collector and advertising executive Charles Saatchi, who financed the shark and subsequent formaldehyde works. Saatchi had the only gallery in London at the time big enough to exhibit these works. Hirst made a number of formaldehyde works including a cow and her calf sliced right through into two vertical halves, exhibited in two pairs of tanks so that the viewer could walk throng the centre of the cow and the calf. He also made a work consisting of a glass wall case filled with rows of fish of different species preserved by taxidermy, all facing the same way (Fish Swimming in the Same Direction) Hirst has made many paintings which fall into three series, the spin paintings (done on a circular canvas spinning horizontally which has multicoloured gloss paint thrown at it), the spot paintings (multicoloured gloss paint spots on white arranged in rows) and the butterfly paintings. The first butterfly paintings were canvases covered with gloss paint in plain colours in the surface of which adhered many different types of butterfly. Most recently Hirst has been covering the canvas entirely with the wings of butterflies, arranged in geometric patterns. Hirst’s paintings are made by assistants to his instructions and produced in large numbers. The spot paintings have become Hirst’s logo, and these signature spots adorned first the restaurant that Hirst opened with Charles Saatchi in London, The Pharmacy, then a Thames riverboat which takes visitors between the two Tate galleries, and finally an unmanned space vehicle which has been sent to Mars. Life and death are the major preoccupations of Hirst’s work made evident by his use of formaldehyde, insects, and medical drugs. Following his work with butterflies, Hirst used flies; a cow’s head was placed inside a three metres high glass tank, and maggots were allowed to breed in it. These turned into flies, which could fly around inside the tank and an interconnected one in which there was a desk and a chair. The flies eventually died, having lived their entire lives in the sealed tank. Medical drugs are used by Hirst to represent both life and death and he has made several works using bottles, cartons, boxes, tubes, and other containers of drugs. These are arranged in glass wall cases showing their predominantly white packaging with blocks of a huge variety of colours giving a particular visual effect when seen in the context of a gallery. Hirst made a room sized installation titled Pharmacy, which contained these cases on all the walls as well as some of the oversized red, green and blue coloured glass decanters that are seen in pharmacist’s windows. Hirst also made a feature film with many of his friends as actors, shot on 35 mm with high production values. In 2003 Hirst continues to make formaldehyde works, for example glass tanks containing animals’ heads with knives plunged into them, or with blood spattered on the wall around them. Damien Hirst’s work is often lampooned by the national press in cartoons. 

!Hobbypop.

Group of German and British artists who work collaboratively. Hobbypop are based in London. Their paintings are often installed both on the wall and propped at angles in the centre of a gallery space. The group also initiates events including guided walks, and theatrical performances. 

!Nicky Hoberman.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes large (up to three metres high) paintings of children. These are done from photographs taken by the artist of children she meets. They are painted as if there is a strange, often green or bluish light cast upon them. The children have exaggerated features and seem to exist in some other world. There is something sinister yet saccharine about the children. Hoberman applies paint smoothly and thinly, all brushstrokes softened out. 

!Candida Höfer.

Photographer born around 1960 who has photographed zoos, libraries and various other institutions. Her images often show glamorous ornate surroundings yet have a cool restrained atmosphere. 

!Evan Holloway.

American artist who makes skeletal models of buildings from twigs and skeletal frameworks from multi coloured metal rods. 

!Georgie Hopkins.

British artist born in the late 1960s. 

!Roni Horn.

American artist working from the 1980s onwards. 

!Kate Howard.

American video artist born in the 1960s. 

!Douglas Huebler.

Canadian conceptual artist. 

!Des Hughes.

British artist born in the 1970s who makes resin cast sculptures of junk. For example Hughes might model old nails in clay and cast them, painting them to look exactly like the real thing. 

!Marine Hugonnier.

French artist who made a film over several months spent in Afghanistan. 

!Gary Hume.

British artist who has represented Britain at the Venice Biennale. Hume is one of the artists in the group known as Young Births Artists or YBAs who emerged in the early 90s. Hume began his career making paintings from hospital doors, which he painted all over with white or cream coloured gloss paint. In fact gloss household paint has become Hume’s trademark and he never uses anything else. Hume went on to make figurative paintings mostly portraits in which he vastly simplified the elements of a face, so that it consisted of one or two areas of colour and no features. The paint was poured on, allowed to dry, and then the next colour added. The edge of the dry part acts as a barrier to the next colour. Hume painted the model Kate Moss, a virgin Mary and other images taken from famous paintings, and a baby. He featured plants, and vague interiors, but all in his vastly simplified blocks of shiny colour. The paintings nearly resist interpretation, which is Hume’s intention. He made a video in which he portrays himself as King Canute. Around 2000 Hume began to make sculptures, bronze snowmen, very smoothed out shapes painted in shiny pale colours. 

!Per Huttner.

Swedish artist who make socially inclusive work in which he often invites the viewer to participate. 

!Pierre Huyghe.

Swiss artist who makes photographs and videos. One photograph shows a stone frozen in mid air over a motorway. The stone looks like a boulder implying impending tragedy as it will surely cause a terrible accident, until the viewer realises that it is a tiny pebble that has been photographed as it drops from a bridge over the speeding cars. 

!Cathy de Monchaux.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes sculptures and installations. De Monchaux made a number of wall mounted works in the early 1990s from machined metal templates, bolted together with velvet, fur and leather often red or purple or black which was clamped between the metal but spilled out in carefully contrived folds. These constructions had a sexual fetishistic quality, they hinted at a purpose but remained ambiguous. They have a slightly gothic appearance but also a heavy metal aesthetic. Put simply they contrasted the supposedly masculine with the feminine, the functional with the luxurious to create decidedly feminine and visceral forms, which often alluded to the female body and genitalia in particular. De Monchaux continued to develop this way of working by expanding the scale of her sculptures, making repeating units and larger more complex forms, using a wider palette of coloured fabric and other materials, and sometimes making floor based installations. 

!Yasu Ichige.

Japanese artist living in London, Ichige makes videos usually featuring himself. In one he places a car directly in front of a wall and puts his foot on the accelerator, driving into the wall without moving until the tyres catch fire and the engine gives up. Another shows Ichige enter an amusement arcade dressed in full racing driver gear. He sits in a seat in front of a racing game and plays the game, winning the race without dropping any points. We see the game from his point of view. 

!Inventory.

British artist group who make socially engaged and political work and publish a journal, Inventory. Inventory’s work usually consists of installations, often some kind of stand or kiosk like structure, with a variety of photographic and text works. They take the position of proselytisers for a new way of life, highlighting the dystopian elements in everyday life and imagining collective actions. An example is a photo collage of London in 2002 showing the city as if it were about to collapse. Inventory have spray painted anti American slogans on the walls of a museum in which they were invited to show. 

!Jim Isermann.

American artist who makes multicoloured tapestry quilts and cubes. The tapestries hand stitched in repeated geometric patterns. 

!Runa Islam.

Twentieth century artist who makes films that are concerned with ethnicity. 

!Christian Jankowski.

German artist born in the 1970s who makes video, installation and sound work. In Bank, Jankowski hired security guards to keep people out of a empty disused bank, the result of which was that people wanted to enter a space they ordinarily would have ignored. In another work Jankoswki recorded a board meeting at a national art museum, and then got children to speak the transcript. Because the children had no understanding of the issues discussed they gave the transcript an entirely new and rather odd emphasis. Jankowski often uses actors. In another work he asks actors to record the reading of the extended email correspondence between himself and his girlfriend when they were apart for several months. Again he was interested in the different inflexion and emphases given to the transcript. Jankoswki is interested in what happens if slight subversions are made to everyday materials and locations. 

!Chantal Joffe.

British artist born in the 1960s, Joffe paints children and women in loose expressive style. Her paintings are usually very small, no more that 20 or 30 cm high, made on board with oil paint. She uses photographs as her source. Joffe often exhibits groups of paintings together arranged in a line or on a grid pattern. 

!Alison Jones.

British figurative painter who began working in the 80s and 90s. at the beginning of 2000 Jones began to make site specific installations by painting directly on walls using projections of shadows (for example of people who might inhabit the room someone on their hands and knees vomiting, or a cleaner going about their work, painted in flat black silhouette) and by wallpapering architecturally complex sections of the interiors of buildings using multicoloured striped wallpaper. 

!Gareth Jones.

British sculptor, formerly a critic and curator, Jones makes singular and highly crafted objects, a red yellow and blue cube with one side missing, a paint handkerchief made by painting several layers of white paint onto a handkerchief and peeling off the paint, a peacock feather stuck into a wall, works using unspoiled cassette tape, stainless steel minimal box floor pieces, a series of plinths made of different materials, some with words on, commenting on the display of art and turning the plinth in art object, a cape made of raffle tickets, works using LP covers, drawing pins, tape, and architectural model like constructions. Often a homage to a musician, for example David bowie. 

!Sarah Jones.

British artist who makes hard edged abstract pattern paintings that take the facades of modern buildings as her subject. She minimises the detail in these and produces brightly coloured grids which have a perspective to them, the grid is in white. The high gloss paint is meticulously neatly applied. 

!Zebedee Jones.

British painter born in the 1970s who makes abstract paintings by putting a vast quantity of very thick oil paint in a single on a canvas (usually under one metre high) and spreading it across the canvas leaving the brush marks readily visible. His paintings are really no more than thick layers of paint and as such they draw attention to the physicality of painting. 

!Ben Judd.

British artist born around 1970 who takes photographs that allude to glamour photography, using amateur techniques such as Vaseline on the camera lens. In 2002 he began making short video films that show groups of people involved in photo shoots and film making watching the actors and models, who are never shown. Judd’s work thus becomes a study of the viewers, of vicarious pleasures, revealing these men in their absorption. 

!Isaac Julien.

British artist who makes films, usually presented in two or threes screen forma. Julien uses 35 mm film and projects his films in especially exhibition spaces. He is interested in masculine identity and sexual and ethnic specificity. His films have a still, dream like quality, with high production values. 

!Alan Kane.

British artist who worked with Jeremy Deller on a work called the Folk Archive, a collection of British folk and craft objects. 

!Ann Teresa Keersmaeker.

Dutch artist ! Seydou Keita. An African artist who photographed the extraordinary qualities he found in ordinary people. The photographs are black and white. 

!Mike Kelley.

US artist making sculptures and drawing, Kelley has a particular interest in history, politics and the state. Often uses unwanted and second hand materials, car boot and charity shop purchases. Series of formal sculptural works using soft toys, for example a large wall relief made off found soft toys sewn onto a found blanket, which uses abject objects to makes reference to abstract expressionist painting, and highlights craft and homemade qualities, drawing a comparison between different values assigned to cultural production. Similar floor pieces – two soft toy dogs face each other across a small blanket, somehow an encounter that seems serious and eloquent. A number of different sized toys under a large grey blanket entitled Lumpenprole a jokey reference to the greyness and poverty of ordinary working lives and a pun on the German – a lumpy grey blanket is just what the work appears to be. A large collection of soft toys fills a room neatly laid out on trestle tables, all accompanied by measuring sticks, as if in some kind of statistical survey, post mortem, or the aftermath of a mass disaster like an air crash. The soft toys used to represent human kind in its lowliness and vulnerability. Kelley manages to use these materials in such a way as to produce a formal sculptural works that have a seriousness that belies their existence as discarded and undervalued objects. In fact Kelley eschews conventional art materials on the whole. A series of felt banners made in a homespun way, around six feet by four feet, in which he replicates flyers found on the street usually made by grass root organisations bearing populist messages, or even just advertisements. An installation called Plato’s cave which has large panels with drawings of American leaders like Lincoln accompanied by substantial text all round the wall. Drawing with marker pen and use of handwritten text also common in Kelley’s work. 

!Janice Kerbel.

Canadian artist working in Britain, born in 1969. Kerbels’ work is conceptual and usually research based, and is carried out in variety of media, united by her interest in desire and its link to deception. Kerbel’s research often involves a degree of controlled risk, and elements of detective work. The place of desire in Kerbels work is elucidated by her invention of utopian places and ideal conditions. Kerbels earliest works from the early 1990s concern subterfuge and malicious intent. A table is laden with jam made from poisonous plants. Snippings is a series of minute snippings taken from the clothes of strangers, who remain unaware of this affront. The snippings are mounted and titled with the date and the place on the garment and type of garment from which the snipping is taken. Trust Me (Remington) is typed on a blue sheet of letter paper, folded once, with a ring stain from a coffee mug on it. The letter s has jumped and is higher than the rest as if it had been typed on a manual typewriter in the days when the author of a letter could be traced by mechanical faults in the way a typewriter functioned, such as a raised letter. Accompanying this is a disc containing a digital typewriter style font with a raised s that Kerbel has created. Kerbel’s interest in deception led her to invent four Magic Tricks fro which she designed the apparatus as if it were flat pack furniture. The tricks included levitation table and disappearance box. Like much of Kerbels work the plans and drawings are the work, which is never actually realised. This is intrinsic for the success of the work as it hinges on Kerbel’s interest in the desire to do unacceptable or impossible things. Places to Bury a Body illustrates this. A series of photo pHs show very ordinary places such as a front garden, where there is no obvious hiding space but the acknowledgment that a hole could be dug. Or a cliff top over which a body could be thrown. Bank Job (1999) consists of two cork board panels onto which are pinned detailed plans for a bank robbery from an existing bank in the City of London. There are reconnaissance photographs, detailed floor plans, a map of the getaway route, and an exhaustive time line of the robbery, listing all the participants, entrances and exits, times and vehicles involved. Bank Job is a work which presents the inconceivable as something which anyone could carry out. A number of Kerbel’s works are concerned with how to cheat. Home Fittings is a series of floor plans, made for existing rooms and buildings, on which Kerbel indicates where a person might walk in order to avoid any creaking floorboards or flooring, and where a person might stand in relation to doors to avoid casting a shadow that might give away their presence. These places are indicated in the space by the insertion of thin brass rods flush with the floor. Marked Decks are prints showing the backs of packs of playing cards, the patterns on which have been subtly altered to allow a person in the know to deduce the suit and number of the card. A letter typed on blue paper seems to allude to a failed tryst, an unfulfilled desire. A number of Kerbel’s works deal with this explicitly, for example Bird Island (2000) a web project and book. Kerbel invented an island paradise based on a real uninhabited Caribbean island, and designed a website that invited the purchase of timeshare in the island. The topography, flora, fauna and the style of the buildings on the island are explained and illustrated in detail. The site persuade the viewer to buy into a dream which doesn’t exist. Any applicants would receive a brochure. Kerbel even invented a bird, the Exuma Emerald, which she later illustrated by commissioning a drawing from a bird illustrator and the creation of its potential song from a bird song expert, presented as a cd. Further to this Kerbel made a number of drawings of fantasy islands in which she played god, taking control of the climate and thus the flora and fauna. In 2003 Kerbel made a series of drawings of hypothetical planters for specified but unnamed buildings. The planters and the plants they contained are designed to grow the most suitable plants for the buildings climactic conditions in the best possible way, thus the plant lists take account of light quality and direction, temperature and humidity, the planters make the most of available light and maximise the planting relevant to the size of the space. The floor plans indication the light source and type, the scale and disposition of the planters, the function of the building and the climactic conditions There is a respiration garden for a Gym, for example, planters for low light in a Victorian house, a shelf garden for a student room, a hanging garden for a launderette and one for a bathroom both making use of high humidity, and circular garden for a revolving restaurant. 

!Karen Kilimnik.

American artist born around 1960 who is primarily a painter, although she has begun to make photographic work in the 2000s. Kilimnik’s practise is project based. She makes work around a particular theme and usually presents it as an installation. One such project dealt with the fantasy life of teenage girls, and featured a gallery with purple painted walls, drawings on the walls with lots of text which has a diaristic quality, paintings and autumn leaves strewn on the floor. Another had a Russian theme, and has paintings that have qualities of Russian icons, with Russian themes, and snow scenes, objects and stuffed animals and drifts of artificial snow on the floor. Kilimnik’s paintings are rarely more than 60 cm high. Kilimnik has many pets and animals are a constant in her work, in particular a pet cockatoo, a crow called Ralph, and dogs and cats. Ralph’s portrait, Ralph in Ectoplasm, shows him both as he is and covered in ectoplasm. Another installation is based on a detailed study of ballet, in particular Giselle, and features gallery walls painted dark red, the paintings and drawings in black frames depicting scenes from the ballet, imagined related scenes, and a sculpture on a plinth. Some of the paintings have black velvet ribbon bows on the frame and silk flowers. Kilimnik’s work hovers close to kitschness and sweetness which is held in check by her skill as a painter and the darkness of some of her subject matter. In 2001 Kilimnik made a series of photographs of central park in New York showing the park in winter in low light conditions. By careful framing, the light conditions, and aided by the appearance of a horse drawn carriage used to convey tourists on sightseeing tours, Kilimnik showed the park as if it had been photographed in the nineteenth century. These were shown alongside a number of landscapes and cityscapes that are also painted in an anachronistic style. Kilimnik’s work is distinctive for its combination of rich reference to the past and the history of art with an autobiographical and contemporary approach to painting. 

!Scott King.

King is a British artist born in the 1960s and publisher of an magazine called Crash!. Crash! is a broadsheet sized magazine written and designed by King and another person, which features anti establishment satire and polemic mixed with cultural criticism and appreciation in the form of poster style text, graphics and images. It is witty and uncompromising, and is a hybrid of magazine and art work which is implicitly critical of the magazine publishing industry. King’s solo work draws on these approaches. He has made collages from magazine images and a large number of text works often in the form of numbered lists. In the 2000s King’s texts became more autobiographical and often self deprecating. They are designed and typeset in Kings very visual style. One work is entitled ‘Why I Never Became A Punk’ and consists of a list of the reasons for this. 

!Joanna Kirk.

British artist who makes large scale figurative pastel drawings. 

!Michael Klega.

German artist born in the 1960s, Klega makes wall drawings form unspoiled cassette tape wound round map pins, sculptures from plastic water bottles. He utilises everyday materials like adhesive tape to make his minimal but often dryly humorous works. 

!Jochen Klein.

German artist born in the 1960s died in the late 1990s. Klein’s water colour and collage paintings have an oneric atmosphere, as if the protagonists were lost in time. The collage, usually an image from a magazine often a person, is often the starting point for a painting. Klein extended the collaged image by painting out from it. He used thin washes of colour on a white ground, often leaving areas deliberately unfinished, to make translucent and light filled images. He uses Klein also made works on paper including a pop up book made from collaged images featuring a pop up penis as its centrefold. 

!Ulli Knall.

Swiss artist living in Britain who makes ceramic sculptures. Knall has made a series of small busts of characters from television programmes such as Star Trek, and other invented characters, as well as portraits of her friends. These are modelled in a simple almost naïve style. Other works include small fountains. Most of Knall work is on a domestic scale, ranging between 30 to 80 cm high. The sculptures are painted and glazed carefully in realistic colours. 

!Jutta Koether.

Koetther is a German artist born in the 1960s who makes large messy paintings and drawings with text added. These are apparently autobiographical and personal but remain mysterious. The paintings are large and scruffy, often appearing to have been made on the floor over a period of time. 

!Tania Kovats.

British artists who uses model making materials to construct landscapes on shelves mounted on the wall, grassy hills and valleys with trees, rivers and lakes, microcosmic three dimensional landscapes. 

!Elke Krystufek.

Austrian artist born in 1970s whose subject is herself and her own body portrayed in videos, drawings and paintings of herself in her daily life. However Krystufek often appears naked, usually made up with the red lipstick which is characteristic of the videos and the drawings, sometimes in an abject state and her work is also a portrait of neurosis. Her emotional state is usually unexplained and never indulgent. A video self portrait, for example is shot with a hand held (thus never more than arms length away) as she spins around dancing. Her own apartment is often the setting for the work. 

!Wolfgang Laib.

artist working from the 1990s onwards, Laib makes installations. He made a floor work by sifting bright yellow pollen over a large rectangle shape in an even layer, the colour startlingly bright. The effect of this work lies in the contrast between the minimal quality of the work, the quantity of the material and the viewers knowledge of the organ and potential of the material and the work required to obtain it. 

!Jim Lambie.

British artist working from the 1990s onwards who made a number of floor installations in which the floor of a gallery or museum is entirely covered in stripes made of plastic tape in different colours and widths, the stripes following the floor plan of the room, running round the edge of the room and moving inwards towards the centre of the room concentrically until the centre is reached. Sometimes Lambie might use black and whiter tape, or metallics. Lambie also made wall sculptures from ordinary domestic objects such as record player turntables, mattresses, mirrors which are covered in glitter. 

!Sean Landers.

American artist born in the 1960s who made a number of very large text paintings in the 1990s. the text on these paintings is essentially a diary of his life as an artist. In these works Landy tries a new way of carrying out the traditional task of the artist to make life into art. The canvas of one 3 meter high painting rolls onto the floor at the bottom, reaching toward the viewer implying a physical inclusion in the work, and in the viewing and reading space. Landers went on to make a series of very large paintings after famous artists such as Picasso, copying works and adding to them, so that they are instantly recognisable but recognisable different. 

!Michael Landy.

Landy is a British artist who was born in the 1960s. He began career making obsessively detailed cartoon like drawings in black pen featuring a multitude of images and text. These drawings created an alternative world of social and political comment and from them emerged a large scale installation, Scrapheap Services in the late 1990s. Scrapheap Services is a fictitious company which carries out the collection and disposal of unwanted members of society. What Landy showed was a collection of the trolleys, uniforms, printed literature, signage, bins and waste bags, all bearing the companies logo and livery. The paper literature was stern all over the floor as if it were itself rubbish. He also made a flower stall. Landy's next large scale work further developed his interest in human waste and the value of inanimate objects, sentimentality and materiality. This involved the professional construction of a large waste disposal plant consisting of a conveyor belt for sorting, various grading machines and a compressing, shredding and grinding machines, reducing everything to a pulp. Landy passed every single item had every owned through this machine: the contents of his flat, his car, his clothes. The item he found most difficult to destroy was his deceased fathers coat. The machinery was installed in a temporarily empty department store ground floor and open to the public every day. The list of items destroyed remains as the document of the work. In 2003 Landy made a number of botanical drawings of weeds species and varieties that might be found growing in the streets and waste areas of London. 

!Abigail Lane.

Born in eh 1960s Lane has made a number of installations. For one of these she papered a gallery space a wall paper printed with bloody hand prints. In the centre of the room a female figure constructed from a collection of clothes, shoes and a wig hung from a rope. 

!Langlands and Bell.

Two artists who work together producing works that investigate architecture and the built environment and its relating to the lives of people. In the late 1990s they made a work which consisted of a series of white chairs with models of buildings set into seats visible through a glass top to the seat. They made a series of works about the panopticon plan for prison buildings. 

!Matthew Leahy.

British artist born in the 1970s died in 1999. Leahy made landscape paintings in particular snow capped mountains. 

!Mark Leckey.

British artist born 1976 makes video and sound installations. Leckey’s work comes out of club and street culture, but has a serious intent. His video Fiorucci made me hardcore shows intercuts footage of the British northern soul scene with hardcore house clubs, edited to make a compelling testament to transcendence through dance and music. Other works come out of his experience as a dj. Member of the art ban Donatella. 

!Marysia Lewandowska and Neil Cummings.

British artists working together who make theoretical conceptual investigations into economies, culture and knowledge, resulting in a socio political project based practise which may be presented in many different forms. They made a project in London with the Bank of England which was the result of a period of research. They presented documentation of their research and made it possible for museum visitors to interact with their work. 

!Mark Lewis.

British artist born in the 1950s who works in 35 mm film and video. Lewis’s work since the 1980s has stemmed from his interest in and knowledge of the history of cinema. He uses the structure and visual language to construct short looped films presented as installations and longer more narrative scripted films using actors. Lewis presents everyday scenes and situations through the lens of cinematic production, prompting the viewer to consider the inconsequential as a moment of grandeur, and to question what they are seeing. A short looped film made in the late 1990s shot from inside a café A woman is talking to a man outside on the pavement right in front of the window. But there is something odd about their conversation. The man doesn’t seem to be listening to the woman. Eventually a car passes and disappears mid screen. Then other traffic does the same, coming from both directions, as do pedestrians. Now the viewer begins to think that they are watching a split screen, a convention occasionally used in cinema to show a telephone conversation or to show two things happening simultaneously, and that in fact the couple are not talking to each other but to others. Finally it becomes clear that in fact the dividing on the screen is in fact the edge of a mirror on the wall of the café, which exactly reflect the street outside. The woman is in fact reflected in this mirror and is talking to someone else out of view. The man is seen through the window and is on his own, waiting. A film made in a city housing estate shows a concrete walkway with tower blocks rising above it, the vast empty space punctuated and enlivened by children playing games. Another film shows a derelict building of which only the façade and floors. The camera moves towards the building extremely slowly. As it moves the viewer becomes aware of the trajectory of the camera, something that is largely unnoticed usually. It is moving in and down from a great height and the shot is continues. The camera reaches the building and enters a window. On a table in the empty roofless space is a child’s spinning top. This short looped film places the viewer in the position of the camera and makes the process of filming evident and the subject of the work. The camera is finally understood to be on a very high crane which is also moving on a track, usually only associated with big budget film making. Another work shows A section of an black and white silent film showing an elevated cast iron railway upside down. A landscape work shows an iced over lake in a snowy landscape with a solitary skater on the ice. Lewis has made narrative films using actors, including one shot in a garden in California which uses porn actors, one shot in a Californian desert hotel, Peeping Tom (a homage to the feature film of the same name) and The Pitch, which shows Lewis himself standing in the middle of the main concourse of a railway station talking to the camera, oblivious to the people around him. By the end of his monologue it becomes apparent that he is pitching the idea for the very film that the viewer is watching directly to the viewer. 

!Cedar Lewisohn.

American or Canadian artist who makes abstract pattern paintings and related drawings which reflect his work as a dj. 

!Glenn Ligon.

American artist born in the 1960s who made work about black American identity. A lot of Ligon's work took slavery and its legacy as a starting point. He made installations and added text to them and also made photographic works. A canvas punch bag hanging from the ceiling on a rope has a poetic story of a slave prize fighter stencilled on its white surface in black letters, as if it were both a painting and a sack. This object symbolised the body of the slave, captive to be treated as an object, subjected to punches, traded as goods. A boxing ring has text inscribed around it in a similar way. Ligon made a version of the US Flag drawn in black with words where the stars and stripes would be. In his work he drew attention to the objectification of black Americans, particularly black American men. 

!Hilary Lloyd.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes video films that she terms sculptures. Lloyds films are always presented on a specified size of monitor anything ranging from a portable personal TV with head phones to a large monitor. The monitors are placed on monitor stands of a particular type, in particular relation to each other. Some works may consist of two monitors places back to back. The viewer is never a typically passive receiver, since they have to walk round the monitors and Lloyds work is never shown projected. Lloyds films have a minimal sculptural quality. She is chiefly interested in people and banal repetitive activities. For example, in Colin, made in the mid 1990s, a young man standing on some derelict land between two buildings proceed to slowly pick up, examine and discard the items that he finds there, pieces of wood and metal and other kinds of refuse. He does this slowly, very deliberately, as if there were some kind of purpose to his actions, which become quite compelling and graceful in repetition. Colin, like most of Lloyd’s work involving people, met the artist in a club and she persuaded him to allow her to film him. She takes pains to allow her subjects to make their own decisions about what they will do as she films, arrived at through social interaction. In this sense she is emphatically not directing the action. Other works have featured a man pulling a jumper off over his head played in forward and reverse on back to back monitors so that it becomes a kind of dance. There is one of a young man sitting on the floor cutting images out of magazines endlessly. There is a film in which two teenage girls hold a length of string between them, one has ball and slowly unwinds it the other winds the string back into a ball. The end of the film the girls have transferred the string from one to the other. Another film shows a woman in a white trouser suit sitting on a chair one leg resting on the other knee, smoking a cigarette. On the point of extinction of the cigarette the film loop begins again. Most of Lloyd's work is looped, including the works that do not feature people such as one which shows a reflection on the surface of water which is somehow read, the film becoming a shimmering abstract pattern. The films are always static camera single continuous shots, even one in which Lloyd attaches a camera to a skateboard and asks a skateboarder to skate. The resulting film of pavement, ground and then graffiti covered walls as the skateboard goes vertical is accompanied by the sound of the wheels. Similarly a film shot again form a static camera placed on the windowsill of the revolving restaurant in the post office tower show 360 degree panorama of London in the time it takes for the restaurant to revolve – this is quite slow so the image only changes imperceptibly. Lloyd made some films in which two djs are in a taxi going from one job to another, and a text and photographic work which features a dj called princess Julia. Later works from the early 2000s show the spray from a fountain against backdrop of trees, ebbing and flowing with the wind and the jet of the water, and a slide projection showing waiters at a café in St. marks square in Venice. Lloyd became interested in groups of people observed rather than single people invited to cooperate. Lloyds work deals with the still moments in everyday life that can be considered as formal visual and discrete. Andy Warhol is a reference point for her work. 

!Hew Locke.

British artist who made Cardboard Palace, a maze that fills a gallery from floor to ceiling made from corrugated cardboard sheets cut into shapes a bit like a Frank Stella wall relief, with light bulbs creating shadows. The cardboard is left brown with only the black felt pen outlines as adornment. The maze leads to a kind of sitting room with a tea table. There is lots of documentation about the British Royal Family pinned to the structures of the maze. 

!Sharon Lockhart.

American artist born in the 1960s who makes films and photographic work. Lockhart’s work has an anthropological vision, she is interested in how the cultural life of different society groups is portrayed by those who study it, and in how this can be made visual, or even in how the artist can make a similar portrayal with very different results. Lockhart made series of photographs of the inhabitants of dwellings that had been visited and described by anthropologists. The dwellings are shown uninhabited, and the inhabitants shown separately. Lockhart spent some time in Manaus in Brazil making a film set in the town theatre. Teatro Amazonia is a hour long single shot film showing the auditorium of the theatre seen from the stage. The audience in the theatre watching Lockhart’s film are put in the position of performers on a stage watching the audience in Manaus. The performance of a piece of contemporary classical music begins, sung by an invisible choir on the stage in the position of the viewers. The music begins with the tuning up of the orchestra and then takes the form of a single note of orchestral noise building into a continuously mutating wall of sound, then fading. The audience on the screen watch, listen fidget, get up and go out occasionally. The minute detail of their behaviour becomes interesting. The viewer is able to watch something that would be unwatchable without the suspense created by the voices of the choir. The films titles list the audience participants, every single one of them, in groups dictated by the barrio that they live in. So that the image of the audience can be seen representing the people of the city of Manaus, and in fact they do this proportionally. The numbers of people from each barrio representing the relative population of each barrio. This list of names also reveals the family connections of the people of the city. Lockhart subsequently made a film in a Japanese gymnasium where a group of women are doing physical drill. This is very regimented but balletic in the way that the space seems to be used choreographically. Lockhart films in similar choreographed shots to create a mesmeric document of a strict regime, in which the scrutiny of uniformity yields fascination for minute details of difference ! Bridget Lowe. British artist born in the 1960s who works with text. Lowe made a work in which she took the titles of books and typeset them as a continuous text. She also made a work fro the web in which a text is presented to the viewer at a controlled pace. 

!Colin Lowe and Roddy Thompson.

British artists who work together, both born in the 1960s. Lowe and Thompson have for a number years been conducting tongue in check correspondence with businesses, public agencies and institutions about art and artists. They make outlandish requests, complaints or suggestions but these are made in absolutely conventional ways, most often in the form of letters which themselves constitute the artist’s work. They have also made site specific work including street banners. 

!Sarah Lucas.

Lucas is a British artist born in the 1960s, one of the so called Frieze generation of artists who were working in London in the early 1990s. She was a close friend of Tracy Emin’s at this time and the two artist’s opened a shop together. Lucas’s work shows a preoccupation with sex death and female identity within a framework of humorous abjection. The work with which she became known was a mattress from a double bed placed against a wall, hall of it propped up, half on the floor. Inserted in openings cut in the mattress were two melons at the top on one side and a bucket on the part resting on the floor below them, whilst on the other side a cucumber was inserted at an angle of 45 degrees from the mattress, at the same level as the bucket. This was a crude but very expressive representation of the male and female forms reclining in bed and like a lot of Lucas’s work a crude humour is used in a sophisticated way to represent universal sexual desires by formal but unconventional, and by implication not traditionally male sculptural means. Another work in similar vein A Kebab and Two Fried Eggs consist of an old wooden table with two fried eggs placed on it at one end and a pitta bread containing doner kebab at the other end. Plainly suggestive of female sexual anatomy, this work also represents the female form lying on a table, suggestive of sexual intercourse in simultaneously humorous and slightly threatening ways. Other early works have become iconic, in particular a photographic self portrait, one of a continuing series, of the artist sitting in a chair with feet up on a table at the front of the image nearest the viewer, clad in work boots. This uncompromising image presents Lucas as a female artist in male pose and clothes, a subject to which she returns often in these photographs. She holds a beer can between her knees and pulls the ring tab, for example, and the beer which has been shaken, spurts upwards. She sits on a toilet, her trousers round her ankles. Her work boots which she is wearing in all the photos, are shown on their own. Lucas often has a cigarette hanging from her lips. These and other images portray the artist as a working man, bringing the viewers own preconceptions to their attention. Small sculptures, such as a cast of the artists genitalia in a homage to Duchamp (a major influence), Lucas’s own work boots with razor blades inserted into the sole at the toes also explore the theme of masculine and feminine identity as well as traditional artist’s themes such as the nude body and the self portrait. A collage of newspaper images from the Sun newspaper featuring vastly overweight women shows a distorted image of femininity. In later works Lucas began to model forms more literally as in her series of sculptures which are covered entirely in cigarettes stuck on in a mosaic pattern, such a s motorbike and an enlarged garden gnome. Quite apart from the characteristic inappropriateness of the materials the apparent cost of materials is striking. The display of the materials of addiction and over consumption is in tune with the associations with drink in particular beer in the earlier work. A car is used in a large installation. The car has a mechanism in it that makes it bounce rhythmically, to give the impression that a couple are having sex inside and bouncing on the seat. The Bunny Girl is another later work, this is a representation of a playboy bunny girl made from stuffed pantyhose draped on a chair to suggest arms and legs, and a pair of ears and a fluffy tail. This utterly abject object conveys both the idea of a bunny girl astride a punters lap, or straddling a chair and the idea of a woman as flesh encased in nylon tights or even of a sex toy, a toy woman. 

!Jeff Luke.

British artist born around 1965 died 1996. Luke’s sculptures are made essentially from rubbish and throwaway materials, yet they have a strongly formal quality. His sculptures are often on the floor, usually installed and involving a large number of parts, reminiscent of American scatter art of the late 1970s. A number of rubber band balls some about 60 cm in diameter, are arranged on a low plinth, as if they were a Henry Moore or Barbara Hepworth carved stone sculpture. Instead the abstract forms, pebble like shapes, are the result of hours of obsessive activity. Luke took a mindless doodle like activity and expanded the scale to make a sculpture. Cosmetics and toiletries such as hair shampoo and conditioner, cleaning fluids, and other household liquids are places in tiny 2 cm high sample tubes, which are numbered to refer to a key telling the viewer what they contain. These are then placed on a shelf in a row, creating a formal work from the great range of colours of the liquids. Other works consist of unidentifiable bits of small rubbish (this quality of anonymity, a sense that the object is a part of the unknown larger whole seeming to be the criteria for selection), placed in a careful arrangement on the floor. 

!Ken Lum.

Canadian artist ! Christina Mackie. Scottish artist born in 1960 who makes sculptures and video, which are conceptual, cool and restrained and have a poetic minimalism. Mackie might place a monitor showing a piece of road with traffic sounds next to a railway sleeper, or use a telephone which the viewer can pick up and listen to a sound. Monitors are often placed on or situated in constructions made of old timbers. 

!Goshka Macuga.

Polish artist living and working in London born 1970, Macuga makes environments in which she curates exhibitions. She may create a cave within a gallery from crumpled brown paper, or a snowy mountain scape from fabric, and fill this space with the work of artists that she has invited to participate. In 2003 she built a wooden cabinet with many doors and shelves to display works of art. Her work as an artist is the exhibition environment that she has created. 

!Elisabeth Magill.

British painter born in 1960s who made a series of paintings of luggage seen through an airport security x ray machine. Later work includes paintings of trees. 

!Martin Maloney.

British artist and former curator who pioneered ‘bad painting’ in the late 1990s, making very large scale monumental figurative works often based on other paintings for example Poussin, for which he used friends and acquaintances as models in a highly ambitious kitchen sink meets Alex Katz style. He also painted still lives and animals, as well as a painting cycle of gay club scenes. Maloney’s work is distinguished by the speed at which he works painting wet on wet with large brushes at speed, rarely spending more that 6 hours on a work. The resulting faux clumsiness was highly controversial but Maloney is representative of a generation of artists who began to make work in hitherto scorned media such as textiles, the so called ‘dumb’ art which combined a knowing intellectualism with great enthusiasm and joy in materials and a freedom from the tyranny of conventional artistic skills. Maloney curated several seminal exhibitions in his own home, including Lost in Space and Die Yuppie Scum and his ‘you can do it if you really want to’ attitude to success in the art world, combined with a willingness to combine the classical with the trashy made him very successful in the 1990s. He works chiefly in oils, but also in watercolour, sticky tape and ceramics. 

!Margarita Manzanelli.

An Italian painter born in 1970s who paints young women, often emaciated but fashionably dressed, in the middle of a large canvas with a plain flat background. The women are characterised by their monochrome flat backgrounds, thin bodies and large often bulging eyes. 

!Christian Marclay.

American artist born in 1957, Marclay worked as a musician and DJ before becoming an artist as well. Starting from his interest in music, Marclay makes video, sound and works on paper. A 2003 installation consisted of six screen projection arranged in a horizontal row, composed of film clips. These were chosen from a huge range of films, documentaries, news footage, and chosen for a particular sound (pitch and quality of sound) as well as for the image. Thus a singing Marilyn, marching feet, shouting, piano player, almost any thing is sampled and used. Marclay built the resulting samples into a complex musical score, fifteen minutes long, which is ‘played’ by the film clips. The viewer is engaged in a compelling set of responses to what they hear and see, having to match sound to image and also to process responses to the image, many of which are consciously or subconsciously recognised. The urge to find a narrative is continually denied, and the viewer is forced to recognise the sound as the narrative instead. 

!Maria Marshall.

A British artist born around 1968 who has made a number of video films featuring her own children, including one of her son smoking. 

!Mike Marshall.

A British artist born in 1970s, Marshall has made a number of films of banal everyday scenes, including a film of a water sprinkler in a garden. The viewer watches the green leaves of the hedge and the waxing and waning of the spray droplets as they sparkle in the sun. Marshall brings a kind of everyday sublime to the viewer’s attention, producing moments of abstract beauty and contemplation from unexpected sources. 

!Jason Martin.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes paintings by applying and thick layer of a single colour of oil paint and combing it with a specially designed tool the width of the canvas (up to three metres high) to add a wavy ridged pattern. This catches the light giving rise to an optical effect. 

!Simon Martin.

British artist born in 1968 whose highly finished conceptual painting and sculpture is concerned with the nature of art. He has made a photo realist painting of a bright red tree frog, a painted fibreglass replica of a carved and painted wooden bird in relief, that is based on an original wood carving, and a lacquered fibreglass sculpture of a toy monkey’s head, enlarged to about four feet in diameter and sprayed in off white gloss paint. His work is laborious and labour intensive, the results of his labour producing luxurious objects that have no clear purpose, making the viewer think about them as art objects. He has also made other conceptual work which is opposite in its choice of more ephemeral materials such as cardboard boxes. 

!Karl Maugham.

Painter born 1960s who paints intensely detailed flowerbeds, every flower given individual attention, on large canvases. 

!Paul McCarthy.

American artist who is well known for his performance work, which is always shown as a video documentation, usually displayed as part of an installation containing the props, set and costumes used in the production of the video. The actual one off performance may be done in front of an audience, but they watch it on a monitor in another room, Macarthy always performing in private. Macarthy appropriates folk tales and popular icons, subverting them by reacting the tales transplanted into his own bizarre and usually scatological world. He draws a parallel between everyday activities and the making of art through his parody of fiction. Macarthy himself usually features as main protagonist/artist. He always uses theatrical costumes and sets, often using masks and props. For example a work titled Heidi and the Grandfather is loosely based on the story of Heidi, but in McCarthy’s hands becomes a tale of child abuse and perverse practices involving faecal obsession. In part of the performance Heidi and the grandfather make sausages from fake faeces extracted from Heidi’s prosthetic bottom. Bossy Burger is a horror story involving a chef character that wears a mask and makes burgers. The film makes reference to Sweeny Todd and a lot of tomato ketchup is used (a development from an earlier video in which Macarthy smears himself liberally from head to foot with tomato ketchup). A film of a Pinocchio character is shown on a monitor in a large box construction with peepholes, which are apparently holes for Pinocchio’s nose, and there are Pinocchio costumes complete with noses for the viewer to put on. As ever, in this work Macarthy makes obvious and puerile associations with his chosen subject and lets the various elements collide to disconcerting but humorous effect. He takes the Freudian claim that art is at base no more than playing with ones own excreta absolutely literally. Macarthy notorious for his wittiest creation, De Kooning, also his cruellest and funniest parody of art and the art world, featuring McCarthy visiting a blue chip dealer and also dressed as a tube of paint throwing him self mindlessly against the studio walls, chanting a tuneless ditty ‘De Kooning, De Kooning’. He mocks the art world's pretensions and contrasts them with the still feted work of the supposedly senile de Kooning. This is perhaps the most extreme example of the way Macarthy focuses on breaking taboos. In 2003 McCarthy made an installation for a London gallery which included President Bush of America and the Queen in the interior of a royal palace. He also made a fifty metre high outdoor inflatable black vinyl sculpture of a figure with a Pinnochio nose. MaCarthy’s comic and clownish portrayal of senility, ketchup and fake faeces smeared over his body and surroundings to mimic blood and shit, scenes of child abuse and indecent or murderous practises: all these are grist to McCarthy's comic tragic mill, his interpretation of the darkest side of human nature as a form of slapstick. 

!Lucy McKenzie.

Scottish artist born in the late 1970s, Mackenzie’s practise is extensive, ranging from painting, drawing, printmaking and writing, to video, installation, dj ing, and event organising. She has also used her work to promote the activities of charities, such as one that supports women in Eastern Europe who are trafficked as prostitutes. Mackenzie's polymorphous practise is the result of an ideological and socially engaged approach to art as a medium with the power to transform daily life. At the same time her work references early twentieth century art, particularly that of Russia and Germany both iconographic ally and in the creation of social events. Her paintings and works on paper often borrow apparently anachronistic historical graphics style, and have featuring athletes, Olympic rings, and graphic and geometric patterns. Or they may be graffiti like, borrowing from classical art and include text. They are painted in faded out colours, drawn roughly or printed on, often on cheap paper which in itself is a symbolic act, as cheap paper and printing methods seem entirely anachronistic in western Europe today, where they are still the norm in many parts of the world. In some sense Mackenzie’s work reflects the state of the body politic, in other senses it is a reflection on the practise of art. She started a club night in her native Glasgow that was and remains a focus for artists and musicians. She also ran a club in Warsaw with Pauline Olowskowa, a long term collaborator, at which they presented events including music, poetry and readings. A video made in 2003 shows Mackenzie and Olowskowa working together in an empty space. Mackenzie is drawing Olowskowa who seems to be doing nothing but talking on the phone. Mackenzie also uses text in her large paintings and painted wall sized murals. A recent printed work features a year planner poster for 2004, blank, with all the weekends blocked out in yellow highlighter pen. 

!Steve McQueen.

British artist born 1960s who works in film and Video. McQueen’s films have a wide range of subjects but share basically sculptural concerns. Bear, made for his post graduate show in 1993, shows two men wrestling naked, shot from below in slight slow motion. Another shows a tightrope walker shot from below, so that we focus on the soles of the feet in special shoes, wobbling on the wire. In both these films by choosing an unusual viewpoint McQueen changes our perception of these spectator activities and shows the effort required to carry them out. In 2001 a film shows McQueen standing before a wooden barn, which subsequently falls apart, the roof collapsing and the walls falling outwards. As it falls, it seems that McQueen will be squashed by the front of the barn but in fact he is standing at the exact spot over which the window falls, leaving him standing with the window opening around him, unscathed. In 2003 he made two more ambitious works The Deep, which he filmed in a mine in South Africa, and the Leap, which showed young boys jumping off a cliff. The Deep takes us down to the coalface in the lift and films at eh coal face, using available light and ambient sound. The result is often extremely and hard to see, with no illumination save the miners headlamps and creates the impression of a kind of hell. The film culminates in a sequence shot in the miners' shower and clocking out hall where each mans temperature is taken. As well as seeking new ways to look at things and investigating the visual perceptions associated with sound, McQueen’s work deals with race and the representation of race in art cinema and photography although he does not claim this for his work. The Deep does this explicitly, but Bear and the Falling Barn are subtler. The barn is based on part of a Charlie Chaplin film in which the same thing happens. 

!Jonathan Meese.

German artist born around 1970 Meese made a number of works in which he covered the walls and ceiling of the exhibition space with a vast quantity of found material, photographs, drawings, images from magazines, in fact any visual material. Discernable themes might emerge. The effect was that of a teenage bedroom vastly expanded, with adult subject matter. Sometimes the material might be sent by post to the gallery by the artist, and the gallery left to mount it on the wall as they wished. 

!Dawn Mellor.

British artist born 1960s who paints women. For a long time Mellor’s paintings were very small and displayed in groups, subsequently she began to make bigger works. 

!Tania Merz.

British painter born 1960s ! Alain Miller. British artist born around 1960 who paints highly realistic images (for example a heart or a brain) which from a part of a larger abstract composition. 

!Lisa Milroy.

British artist born around 1960 who makes figurative painting. Milroy’s work is essentially still life but there is an element of process painting in her work. She often paints multiple versions of the same type of object, set out in rows that cover the whole picture plane, for example shoes or blue and white porcelain plates, with the effect of standardising everything she chooses to paint both in terms of the genre of thing, and in terms of the relation of one type to another. So that car tyres might be treated in the same way as jewellery. The objects in Milroy’s paintings are painted in consistent way, with simple flowing brushstrokes on a flat colour ground, in realistic colours. They look very real viewed from a distance, close to the canvas the paint and brushstrokes are what the eye focuses on. 

!Aleksandra Mir.

Polish artist born in the 1960s who live in America. Mir’s work comprises socially engaged installation and events, combined with the construction of large site specific or temporary sculptures. Mir often chooses to respond to a location or a situation. For example she sited a military tank painted pink on a disused lot in London, where local children play. The tank was photographed with women and girls dressed in pink draped over it in an ironic take on the female military mascot. Mir has made a work based on the Mir space station, and most recently has made an almost life size inflatable jumbo jet which can be sited anywhere. 

!Tatsuo Miyajima.

Japanese artist working from the late 1980s onwards who has made a large number of works using LED displays. A series of works use small LED units placed on the floor or on the wall, showing a very high number, which is constantly changing. This number is in fact the date and time displayed in fractions of a second. 

!Sarah Morris.

American artist born in the 1960s who paints process based geometric pattern works based on the facades of modernist buildings. Morris photographs these mostly glass and metal framed buildings whose main feature is windows, and reduces the resulting grid, distorted due to the perspective of the original photograph, to its basic elements in a computer programme. The grid is painted in one colour, often white, and the ‘windows’ in a number of colours, usually very bright, to create a grid pattern with a nod to Mondrian and to Bridget Riley, although it is more complex and colourful. Morris uses high gloss paint very precisely applied. The paintings (and similar screen print panel series) are about 3 m high and 4 m wide at their largest. Morris also makes films showing the kind of architecture and city that inspires her work, for example a film shot in Miami. 

!Paul Morrison.

British artist born in the early 1960s who began his career in the late 1990s painting trees, flowers and vegetation in silhouette. Morison’s paintings are nearly all made in black on white, showing meticulously drawn plants and trees of varying scale made into a composition, which are painted by hand absolutely flat and hard edged in black acrylic paint on white. He has occasionally made negative versions in white on black. Morison’s paintings are usually around 2 metres high, and he has also made round ones. His wall paintings often span 20 metres. 

!Anna Mossman.

British artist born about 1960 who takes photographs in which she represents sensory experiences or thought processes. In a photograph of a rose the rose is out of focus as if the viewer had leaned close enough to smell the roses perfume. A series of photographs show people who are out of focus to the most extreme degree. For these photographs Mossman asked her subjects to stay in a room alone with the camera, which was set to take a very long exposure. The sitters were to tell the camera a secret. The resulting image is blurred due the movement of the sitter during the telling of the secret, the blurring varying from person to person. 

!Ron Mueck.

British sculptor born in the 1950s who after a career in film industry prosthetics began to make sculpture. Dead Dad brought him to public attention, a life size model of apparently of his own dead father, made with such detail that it appeared to be real. Mueck’s work bears comparison with that of Duane Hanson in the 1960s but the difference is that Mueck experiments with scale and his figures are often naked. Mueck makes his sculptures from fibreglass, which is painted, and human hair applied strand by strand. He has also made a baby, a 6 meter high pregnant woman, a school girl (clothed), a post partum woman lying on her back with her child placed on her stomach, the umbilicus emerging from her vagina still attached to the baby and a man in a boat. Mueck’s sculptures are so realistic as to cease to provoke amazement after a while, since there is no doubt of their perfection. Instead Mueck wants the viewer to confront the human state, which each work represents – death, pregnancy, childbirth, and childhood – by presenting something as close to life as possible. 

!Dave Muller.

American artist who makes paintings in water colour on paper, some of which are quite large, for example a panoramic country scene made on several pieces of paper. Muller stages three day weekend exhibitions in his own house and in galleries which he considers to be part of his practise. In 2003 Muller made a series of paintings of the titles and the names of artists printed on the sleeve edges of the record collections of a number of people. 

!Vik Muniz.

Brazilian artist who makes unconventional paintings. Muniz’s paintings are usually made from newspaper or other photographs which he collects obsessively, for example he made a series of works in which he used treacle to copy well known images such as Jackson Pollock making a painting, which try to be the most basic form of illusion in terms of making a recognisable image. 

!Juan Munoz.

Spanish artist born in the 1950s who died in 2001. Munoz, who was Spain’s best known artist of the end of the twentieth century, made sculpture and installation. One of Munoz’s last works was a very large scale installation at Tate Modern in London. Several ‘elevators’ were constructed which ascend and descent through a false floor. Viewers can see the elevators from the basement level and from above, and watch them ascending in space, in a way that they would never usually be seen. The movement of the elevators echoes that of the pistons of a huge slow engine. 

!Muntean and Rosenblum.

Artist partners working in the late 90s and early 2000s in London who make collaborative paintings depicting usually young people in social situations conversing. Their speech is written on the painting. Muntdean and Rosenblum’s style is strongly graphic, with flat colours, and black outlines and white backgrounds are characteristic. 

!Takahashi Murikame.

Takahashi is a Japanese painter who makes highly decorative intricate and stylised floral paintings made in a flat style which make reference to traditional Japanese painted or woven screens, but are also distinctively modern even futuristic. Brightly coloured, meticulously painted and highly controlled, the paintings have a strongly graphic quality, which makes them difficult to contextualise. Murikame is notably for being one of the most commercially successful artists at the turn of the twentieth century and has a large business empire. 

!Sadie Murdoch.

British artist born in mid 1960s who began making large paintings in the early 1990s based on modernist architecture, specifically interiors, which she drew out on a white ground, usually in black and grey, partially painted using very thin paint, and then partially destroyed by pouring thin paint over the whole. In the 2000s Murdoch began to make architectural models from card and paper, which she again partially destroyed. Later models are more abstract and remain intact. Murdoch's interest in the modernist project in art and architecture has led to explore both abstract expressionism and architecture particularly the work of Le Corbusier. 

!David Musgrave.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes installations; Musgrave's work is essentially a sculptural representation of paint and the painted surface. He cuts out various thicknesses of plastic and other sheet materials, transparent and opaque, to look as if they are poured pools of colour and places them on the floor, overlaying them. The cut outs are complex shapes, as if liquid has been splashed or dropped, creating multicoloured floor pieces. Musgrave has also made a number of wall reliefs which are enlarged brushstrokes, modelled and cast and painted in high gloss. The mostly incidental shape and texture of the paint, the blob, the stroke is made into a very deliberate object. 

!Mike Nelson.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes installations that are like mazes. Nelson constructs a series of rooms and corridors within a gallery space, which the viewer enters through a door in the gallery. Inside they are free to wander in the interior space that nelson has created but there is only one way out. The first of these installations created a series of rooms that seemed to have been recently abandoned. Some were like offices in a factory, others empty rooms, all had a feeling of recent presence but also of possible sinister events. There are clues in the form of items pinned to the wall, furniture, but very few objects. The environment seems timeless and the viewer has the disorientating experience of not being able to tell what period, country or type of building they are in. the spaces are extremely real. At a central point in the maze it seems that the viewer has reached the point at which they started but this is in fact a replica of that room and the determined participant carries on to discover several more rooms. There are hints of the psychological pressures that are sometimes brought to bear on prisoners. Another example is a maze Nelson created specifically a museum in London, in which the viewer enters what seems to be a series of back rooms at the museum, storage spaces for works of art and wrapping and packing areas. It is very difficult to believe that this is an installation that has been constructed in the gallery and that the viewer has not entered behind the scenes by mistake, but for the peculiar absence of life and activity. 

!Shirin Neshat.

Iranian artist who has made several large screen projected video installations featuring women wearing the veil and music. 

!Mariele Neudecker.

Artists born in the 1960s who makes installations in which she creates model landscapes such as a sea, or a mountain range. 

!Jacques Nimski.

British artist who makes intentsley detailed pencil drawings of plants that entirely fill the paper. 

!Noble and Webster.

British artist partners born in the late 1960s who make sculpture and installation. Noble and Webster’s work is an unashamed unapologetic ode to money, creation, fame and ego combined with traditional forms, crafts and materials. Their illuminated signs, which lean against the gallery wall or are mounted on it, are an example of this. These may take the form of a dollar sign entirely made of white light bulbs, or of tattoo designs such as a heart stabbed by a dagger with a word on a ribbon, Las Vegas style. Noble and Webster made an installation fro which they made life size models of themselves as apes, cast in fibreglass and walking on a pristine white undulating gallery floor. Another consists of an enormous pile of rubbish, with a strong light projected at it, casting a shadow on the wall behind to reveal the profiles of the artists, created from careful arrangement of the rubbish but only visible as a shadow. 

!Paul Noble.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes pencil drawings, video and animation. Noble’s earliest work consisted of book jackets made for existing books, which altered or repositioned the book in some way, usually through humour or puns, echoing the British playwright, Joe Orton’s illicit alteration of library books. The main body of Noble’s work to date depicts his creation of a fictitious town called Nobson New Town. The architecture of Nobson is constructed on the blueprints of a typographical font created by Noble whose capital letters are three dimensional blocks, enabling Nobson to draw arrangements of building that spell out words. These blocks have the appearance of modernistic concrete structures and the letters are hard to read but decipherable. The Nobson project is an indictment of the way of life in the west, a Swiftian satire describing an urban and rural dystopian with utopian elements. The name Nobson is descriptive of the phallic forms of some of the buildings, and the phallic form is put to use everywhere from tree stumps to drawbridges. There are no people in the drawings. Noble’s drawings have been made since 1997 and show every aspects of life in Nobson from the dwellings, the park, the cemetery, the factories, the sewage works, the school, the hospital, in fact every amenity and faculty a small town would have. There is also a large house for the artist, which has a number of rooms and a tower. The drawings are made in pencil and are about 3 metres high, extremely detailed and finely drawn so that the whole drawing can take a long while to peruse. Any words spelled out by the buildings are readable from a distance only. Noble also makes small drawings showing details from Nobson. The words in the drawings usually spell out a political or ideological statement or quotation that deals in some way with the life of ordinary working people. Noble has also represented Nobson as a photomural, for which he made a tent in the shape of a letter from the Nobson typeface and pitched in a forest. Woodland animals are added to the photograph digitally as if this were a rural idyll. He has made a digitally animated drawing too, which shows the factories of Nobson in a static single shot view, with very little happening save for smoke plumes emitting from chimneys and a train travelling across periodically. 

!Nils Norman.

British artist, who makes installations, works on paper, models and written texts. Norman’s work presents ecological and sustainable models for human existence, in particular urban existence. Norman draws on 1960s and 70s models for resistance, tailoring them to the new century and a new era of globalisation and anti capitalism. In particular he focuses on the modernist myth of creating quality of life for every one through good practise in design and the built environment. His investigations of how to put simple ideas for more socially responsible living into practise take various forms. He has made a number of architectural models that demonstrate for example acts of urban resistance or reclamation such as the conversion of the flat roof of an apartment building in New York into a vegetable plot to enable the residents to be self sufficient. He has also designed and built a sustainable bus called Geocruiser (2001). The bus runs on converted waste fat from the catering industry and has solar panels enabling it to actually return energy to the national grid. It collects rainwater and part of it is a green house with a composter enabling the bus to be used to grow food efficiently. The bus also houses a library of books and texts on ecology and self sufficiency and a computer terminal with internet access, a painter and a photocopier available for public use wherever the bus stops. Visitors can photocopy any texts they wish to take away. Geocruiser visited several cities in the UK and in Europe. 

!Tina O’Connell.

Irish artist born in the early 1960s who makes large scale architectural installations often using concrete, and usually site specific. 

!Chris Ofili.

British artist born in the late 1960s who became known and initially notorious for his pattern paintings and paintings of black women and men with elephant dung attached in the mid 1990s. Ofili's figurative paintings are complex in their execution. A psychedelic pattern is painted first, then a figure added, picked out and filled in exclusively with concentric lines of tiny dots of paint in many colours which follow the contours of the figure. His earlier works have cut outs from pornographic magazines collaged on to the surface. The whole painting is then covered with a layer of poured plastic resin, adding a physical depth to the surface. Elephant dung soaked in resin is attached tot eh canvas, sometimes with words and names picked out in coloured map pins on them. The paintings rest against the wall on two lumps of dung. Ofili mostly made paintings of women in this series which he described as goddesses, highly stylised head and shoulders portraits of woman wearing jewellery, including a black Madonna which created a furore amongst the American Christian right for it juxtaposition of the virgin Mary with elephant dung. He also made a number of full length portraits of male characters including one called Captain Shit, a black superhero. Ofili continued to paint women and to make a large number of watercolours on paper, drawings and prints, until the early 00s. He then made a series of paintings depicting a man and a woman, as lovers, but also as iconographic symbols of Africa and its people. Ofili's continued to use the dung to represent his connection with his mother country (he had begun to use it after his first trip to see where his family had come from). The lovers paintings are made in the same way, but there are fewer collaged elements. Flowers and leaves are added to the backgrounds and the paintings are more reflective. In 2002 he made a series of 13 works featuring a monkey, painted in the same way. These are installed in an especially constructed timber lined room resembling a darkened chapel. Illuminated so that they have an icon like quality each paintings is based on a different colour and titled Mono Azul, Mono Or for example, meaning Blue Monkey Gold Monkey. The twelve monkeys, six on each side of the room, depict the apostles, and the gold monkey at the end of the room is Christ. This work is typically both irreverent and reverent. All of Ofili’s work is characterised by a sense of the profound combined with a highly decorative surface and a dry humour. He plunders popular culture and mixes influence in the same way that hip hop music does. Hip hop is often cited as an importance influence on Ofili’s work. 

!Saskia Olde Wolbers.

Dutch artist born in around 1970 who makes videos based on models that she constructs in her studio which have a spoken narrative voiceover. Olde Wolbers takes a true story, often from a newspaper; a tale of someone’s life or something that happened to someone, and elaborates it, writing a first person narrative which Olde Wolbers chooses a person or an actor to read it. She imagines a scene in which this tale might unfold and constructs a three dimensional model, which she then films. The models are made from a variety of materials – one model of an underground car park also resembles the frosted interior of a fridge but in fact is made from textured plastic sheeting and plastic bottles and cups. Another of a hospital ward is made from a pet cage dipped in household gloss paint and submerged in a tank, filmed underwater. The paint drips but stays in place, creating an eerie white scene. Olde Wolbers films have an eerie often futuristic quality, which is at odds, both with the prosaic materials of their construction and with the true story narrative of the voiceover. The narrative becomes extraordinary both in the writing and in the reading, Watching, the viewer has to grapple with interpreting what they see, which seems very real yet palpably is not and relating it to what they hear. 

!Pauline Olowskowa.

Polish artist who makes drawings and collages, sometimes working collaboratively with Lucy Mackenzie. 

!Hans Op de Bek.

Belgian artist who makes photographs. 

!Julian Opie.

British artist born around 1960 who makes works in a range of media. Pie’s early work consisted of painted cut outs made in folded and bent sheet metal. They stand on the floor and represent objects such as a pile books, telephones, even a painting. The objects are painted in a cartoon style with black outlines. They are Opie’s way of making painting into sculpture. This work demonstrated an interest in generic representation, which has sustained throughout his career. In the late 1980s and early 1990s Opie made a large number of sculptures fabricated from industrial materials. These fall into two groups – case, chest or freezer like constructions and glass screen constructions. The case or chest works are made from sheet metal with aluminium fittings – for example edging, feet and ventilation grilles. They are ambiguous since they are evidently non functional, with no discernible means of opening them, yet they refer visually only to functionality. In them Opie refers both to modernist design and to minimal sculpture in particular referring to the work of Donald Judd. The glass screen works are arrangements of toughened glass in aluminium frames to resemble doors and glass walls that might be seen at an airport or other public space. The glass often has discs etched on it in a row at eye level. These arrangements engage the viewer in a familiar experience of the negotiation of glass barriers, whilst considering the formal arrangement as a sculpture. Opie made a number of works taken from the symbols and pictograms used in signage, developing an idea of the point at which the individual becomes generic and vice versa. Opie has made many paintings and prints, usually screen prints. The road paintings, Imagine You Are Driving, (around sixty cm high) were made after he drove across America, and show roads reduced to the minimum of detail – a black road, with white lines and green verges with blue sky, each rendered in absolutely flat acrylic paint with hard edges. These paintings conflate the experience of driving with the experience of the computer game and make the case for the roadscape being the contemporary landscape painting. A series of night paintings are made in black with blurry circles of yellow, white and red light indicating road lamps and car headlights and rear lights. Opie’s Computer game paintings (similar sized and also two metre high versions made) are a development of the road paintings, representing the same experience of driving but this time through a version of a computer generated urban environment smoothed out so that there is no detail at all. Opie took this approach into three dimensions with his model village sculptures, immaculately made and spray painted buildings with almost no detailing so that they become generic In the late 1990s continuing to work the idea of the generic Opie made a series of digital drawings of people he knew, removing all the detail from a head and shoulders photograph to produce a generic image in black on a brightly coloured background that actually retained a great deal of individuality. These images were used on an album cover and became known to a much wider public. He also began to make digital animations, taking the same principle and applying it to the moving image. He filmed a person moving and reduced this image to the bare minimum, resulting in a moving pictogram, which still retained some of the characteristics of the individual on which it was based. 

!Gabriel Orozco.

Brazilian sculptor who made a work called Ping Pond Table, consisting of two ping pong tables cut in half where the net would be and arranged in a cross shape with a fishpond in the vacant square area in the middle. Four players can play simultaneously, the pond replacing the net as the barrier to be crossed by the ball. 

!Pepon Osorio.

South American artist born in the 1960s died in the 1990s. Osorio made a work in which he cycled around a platform built at the top of a very large tree encircling the trunk. 

!Silke Otto Knapp.

German artist working in Britain born in the late 1960s who makes paintings using watercolour on canvas. Otto Knap’s earliest work in the 1990s was a series of female portraits taken from fashion magazines followed by a series of American landscapes sometimes in panoramic format often taken from Marlboro advertisements and form her own photographs. These became more impressionistic until she began to paint in watercolour on a white ground, making a number of groups of landscapes between 40 and 80 cm high. The watery paint is applied in a gestural manner pooling on the surface creating an often illusory image. A Los Angeles series shows the city by day and by night, as does a group of Las Vegas paintings. Otto Knap then made a number of ‘vegetation’ paintings depicting the greenness of parks, gardens and glasshouses such as Kew with enough detail hinted at for the viewer to interpret the image as a landscape, as well as some yellow desert paintings. More recently Otto Knap has made a number of paintings of show girls, again in watercolour, the colours predominantly red. 

!Laura Owens.

American painter born in the 1970s who makes large semi abstract works using bare canvas as a ground to which she adds blobs of colour and small painted areas. Owens paintings often include flowers and patterns and hint at landscape and nature. 

!Jorge Pardo.

Artist whose designs interiors, furniture and lighting with a distinct reference to modernist design for specific sites. Pardo became known in the 1990s for his displays of lamps and lampshades. In 1999 Pardo gained a commission for a major site specific work enabling him to build a house for himself in California, which he has declared an artwork and opened to the public. The house is a minimal modernist open plan building, filled with furniture and objects designed to Pardo’s specification. 

!Philippe Parreno.

Artist who commissioned the conception and design of and bought the rights to a Japanese Manga cartoon character named Annlee. Parreno then lent Annlee to a number of other artists (including Liam Gillick and Angela Bulloch) inviting them to make work with her. Some artists used her in their own digital animations. 

!Janette Parris.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes drawings, digital animations, writes produces and directs musicals and sings in a band. Her performing activities are part of her practise as an artist. Parris made a series of semi autobiographical cartoons featuring a character called Plank, and also a number of video installations featuring a rag doll called Janette. 

!Richard Patterson.

British painter born 1965, painted hyper realist figurative works, notably a very large landscape format landscape with a massively enlarged plastic toy minotaur figure perched on a motorbike handlebar, the whole painting given a slight blur by the softening of the paint but parts in sharp focus. The effect is one of double take. 

!Toby Patterson.

Scottish artist who makes plan and design based work, and has designed skateboards. Patterson is also a curator. 

!Daniel Perfect.

British artist who makes small decorative paintings and works on paper, landscape like patterns that are reminiscent of the 1950s. 

!Simon Perriton.

British artist born 1962 who makes paper cut outs on a large scale. These are often but not always like doilies made by repeated folding and cutting, and although at first glance they appear as lacy patterns, they are in fact thematic, for example a mushroom cloud in circular symmetry with CND symbol, barbed wire, mixed in with floral patterning to create complex intricate and skilled interwoven patters of great delicacy and fragility. The cut outs may be single or multicoloured and are made by sticking paper together to the required size and then cutting out the design with a scalpel. Perriton sometimes layers versions or the same cut out one colour on top of another. The cut outs are always displayed unframed and unmounted and hang from pins in the wall. 

!Grayson Perry.

British artist born around 1960 who makes coiled ceramic pots and vases richly decorated with drawn images, collaged photographic and printed elements, huge variety of glazes and gold and silver leaf. The pots seem like precious decorative objects but on closer inspection are revealed to bear highly politicised messages and images about issues that concern the artist for example child abuse, torture and a variety of social ills. This juxtaposition of luxury objet d’art with hard hitting message makes the vases transcend their genre. The text and images on the vases describe the grimmest of childhoods and allude openly to incest, paedophilia and child abuse. As an artist, Perry often appears in public as a transvestite called Claire who has a variety of dresses, including a Victorian costume and a dress embroidered with machine guns. She often carries a porcelain doll, Clara, dressed in a matching costume. Perry has also made photographic works of herself as Claire, and embroideries. 

!Raymond Pettibon.

American artist who makes pen and ink drawings. Pettibon's main inspirations are William Blake, surfing, film and cartoons. His drawings often use the cartoon format of a black outlined box, with text at the bottom hand written in capitals, as well as thought bubbles. There is rarely a drawing without text. The transient medium and sometime jokey style he uses and the subject he chooses to explore belies the seriousness of Pettibon’s intent. He often alludes to the larger issues of life, death and the sublime. Surfing is Pettibon’s passion and the surfer in his work symbolise the insignificance of human kind in the face of nature. The surfer might for example be shown at to top of a huge wave, and have a thought bubble with an existential thought written in it. Another drawing might feature a gun, or a light bulb with a caption. Some of the captions read like lines from a forties film noir. Pettibon’s drawings are either around 25 or 60 cm high, made on white paper, usually exhibited pinned to the wall unframed. 

!Elizabeth Peyton.

Artist born in the 1960s who paints portraits of her friends and of famous people. These are often pop stars, and have included the British royal family. Peyton’s work in the 1990s often captured the zeitgeist, yet her work also refers to the history of portraiture. The paintings are all done from photographs. Peyton always paints on board, quite small (around 50 cm high maximum) in portrait format, using translucent colour rapidly and simply applied. The white paint used for the ground and the coloured paint often drips over the edge of the board. 

!Daniel Pflum.

German artist who makes sculptures that appear to be corporate logos and signs. 

!Vong Phaophanit.

Vietnamese artist who made an installation for which he covered the floor of a gallery with rice which concealed a red fluorescent tube running the length of the gallery which sent red glow through the rice. 

!Sarah Pickstone.

British painter born in the early 1960s. 

!Jack Pierson.

American artist who makes photographs, paintings, sculptures and installation. Pierson’s work is diverse – his photographs are of everyday scenes given a fairy tale twist. His paintings are really photographs printed on to the canvas using a three colour printing process that transfers pigment in discrete dots of colour. His installations are various, examples are a section of wall and floor painted yellow with a cabinet with a record player on it, some LPS which the viewer is invited to play and a chair, and a section of the wall and floor painted purple with a made up single bed placed on the floor well away from the wall on which the viewer is invited to lie. Pierson’s sculpture in the main consists of phrases, sayings, and truisms spelled out with found signage lettering on the wall. The lettering is all in different styles materials and sizes, some old, some new, some Perspex, some moulded plastic, and some painted or gilded wood, some cast or cut metal. 

!Hadrian Piggot.

British artist best known for a body of work he made in the 1990s. Piggot crafted porcelain sculptures that took the form of bathroom sinks, for example, their forms changed to smooth rounded abstract shapes, convex where they should be concave, entirely without function yet with the addition of chrome taps and other fittings they became surreal objects. A plughole might be placed on a bulging shape where no water could ever collect. Piggot had leather cases made with satin lined moulded inserts to hold the sculptures, adding to their surrealism but inferring a useful portability. He also made some carvings from bars of soap. Piggot late began to make photographs of landscape. 

!Keith Piper.

British artist. 

!Michelangelo Pistoletto.

Italian sculptor working from the 1980s onwards who makes installations usually featuring mirrors made of steel. The mirrors are deployed as a literal way of making the viewer part of his work. Sometimes the mirrors have something printed on them. He also made an installation consisting of a mountainous pile of second hand clothes which viewers were invited to help themselves to. 

!Lari Pittman.

American painter who became extremely popular in the 1990s for his intensely intricate and complex abstract paintings. Pittman draws on a multiplicity of sources, borrowing with impunity and putting together intense compositions that owe something variously to fabric design, the 1950s, architectural drawing, pop art, cartoons, and post modern painting. It is impossible to locate the source of the elements of a Pittman painting because there are just so many elements and they are so perfectly graphically intertwined. But what makes Pittman’s work particularly distinctive is the method he uses to make them. The main design is outlined and painted in flat colour. This in itself produces a complex very brightly coloured painting. Then dots of paint, squeezed onto the canvas (the dots no more than 2 mm across) are used to outline some areas, fill in others. The dots are three dimensional and it becomes hard to believe that the painting could have been made by hand, although it clearly has. Pittman’s paintings function as a bold design with an overall structure as well as a surface of patterns within patterns that seems to have more in common with embroidery than painting. 

!Sigmar Polke.

A German artist who began working in the 1960s. Polke is famous for painting on tea towels (also on bed sheets, table cloths and curtains) In fact he tends to eschew canvas as ground altogether, sometimes working on resin panels as well as a huge variety of woven and printed textiles. Much of his work has photographic screen printing as well as hand painting. The screen print is usually a fragment of a vastly enlarged image from a newspaper, the dots that make up the image as big as a coin, printed in black. Polke’s hand painted is usually black outlines of figures and objects. Polke’s paintings depict such subjects as war, classical myth, weaponry, and rural idyll and are notoriously resistant to interpretation. Many of the images are taken from newspapers as if to address the proliferation of imagery and the difficulty of assimilating it. The fabric and pattern of the background is carefully chosen. Sometimes two or more contrasting panels are stitched together. Polke is a painter who is concerned with surface and image, what is real and not real, how an image is read, in what order and how narrative reading can be imposed and obstructed. In the late 90s and early 00s, Polke pursued his interest in enlarging printed images by making use of digital images and large format printing to produce 20m wide enlarged newspaper images, printed on vinyl coated fabric. 

!Rona Pondick.

British artist who makes sculpture by reupholstering and altering furniture. A chair might have legs like an animal for example. A sofa might have its shape altered to allude to the female form. Pondick’s work is influenced by surrealism in the way she transforms an everyday object. 

!Larry Poons.

American artist working from the 1980s onwards, Poons’ meticulous cartoon like paintings usually depict landscape with text on panels within the composition. For example a gravestone or the pages of an open book might carry the text, which is painted as if it were a printed typeface. Poons paints in a precise way using flat shiny colours and hard edges. 

!Kathy Prendergast.

British artist who has made a series of abstracted map or plan drawings of cities. These are extremely detailed pencil drawings about sixty cm high, showing the basic street plan and zones of a city, but without using any conventional cartographic. They have the appearance of cobwebs, or organic forms. 

!Monique Prieto.

American artist who paints large flat coloured abstracts which look at first as if they are accidental ‘pours’ of colour but which in fact are drawn on a computer first. Prieto says that she evolved this method of working after the birth of her children to speed up the production process, enable her to do some preparatory work at home and make the most of her time. The paintings are cool, calm and reflective. 

!Lisa Prior.

American artist who makes video works featuring her alter ego who is an expert in any chosen field. Prior’s films borrow the style of corporate or promotional video, and she appears as a psychiatrist fro example, telling the viewer about a certain psychiatric condition. Or about the mental health of Vietnam veterans. Or about her own dating experiences. Prior’s persona is compelling but ultimately fallible and not without humour. More recently Prior has made a work which has more formal concerns. She filmed a dog shaking itself, then looped this short section and slowed it down. The sound of the bell on the dogs collar is transformed and the dogs shaking appears graceful and deliberate. 

!James Pyman.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes pencil drawings on paper. Pitman’s drawings are often large, up to one and a half meters high, and depict a variety of subjects ranging from groups of people to landscapes or even just a view of waves on water. They are drawn in a soft but precise way, the pencil smudged to create soft shaded areas. 

!Mark Quinn.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes sculpture. Quinn’s best known work is Blood Head, a cast of his own head made from several pints of his frozen blood. This is displayed in a refrigerated vitrine on a plinth. Quinn’s work is mostly concerned with the human body, life and death. A companion work to Blood Head is Bread Head, a bust modelled from bread dough and baked. Quinn pursued his interest in preservation through freezing in other works. He used a species of frog, which hibernates, at sub zero temperatures in suspended animation, displaying the frog in a block of ice in a refrigerated vitrine. He also made a larger work using a mass of frozen flowers. Quinn also cast his own body and used it to produce a thin latex skin, which he hung form a hook in the ceiling, as if it were his own flayed skin. More recently Quinn has been pursuing his work with flowers and making photographs. 

!Fiona Rae.

British artist born around 1960 who makes abstract paintings and works on paper. Rae uses the brush stroke and the mark as her subject, and in her paintings from the late 1980s to the 00s she has consistently explored the possibilities of the gesture as a formal element of composition. Rae uses a huge range of colours and type of mark, from rough wide brushstrokes to thin solid lines. These do not follow any figurative logic but are discrete elements that make up the whole. The paintings are coloured grounds with decorative marks arranged densely over them, the marks refer Rae’s work invokes post modern ideas of mimesis and quotation, since she is not just making a mark but reproducing generic mark making, as well as borrowing from the history of painting for her sources. The paintings are usually about 2 metres high. In the 2000s, Rae has introduced photo collage of found images and uses digital technology to reproduce and rescale painted areas that interest her. 

!Michael Raedecker.

Dutch artist born in 1961 who makes figurative paintings that incorporate thread. Raedecker, a former fashion student, uses thread as a drawing medium, to describe outlines, textures, surfaces and light. He first paints the background, very often using thick and even pooled paint, and then hangs the canvas so that he can sew through it. Sometimes the thread is pushed through wet paint, or paint applied over it so that it becomes impregnated. In the late 1990s Raedecker’s first series of thread paintings featured the interiors of hotel rooms in grey, ochre, pale pink and beige. A lampshade might be filled in with satin stitch, a bedcover with a textured thread, and a rug with tufts of wool. There is also a painting of an empty cinema auditorium. However thread is used more unconventionally to represent light and shade. Another group of works made at the same time show odd figures, often wielding guitars, their hair done in thread. These figures seem as if they might be the inhabitants fop the hotel rooms. They also refer obliquely to the rock group Kiss, who wear costumes and face paint. The rooms are small paintings but the following group of work depicting modernist suburban houses are about 2 metres high. In these, a picture window at night might be filled in with lengths of thread across its width to simulate reflective light. Small knotted threads indicate shrubs and trees. Like the earlier works these are based on found photographs. Raedecker’s use of thread to depict plants, shrubs and trees led him to make a group of landscape paintings, often very large. These include a number of scenes of barren desert as if from a western, with stunted trees and parched earth. The thread detail is used to describe plants and also shadows. At this time Raedecker also made a number of more abstract works based on the shapes of male and female genitals, thread representing pubic hair, as well as a series of portraits of old men. The occasional appearance of a bird in the landscapes is transferred into a number of still lives made in the early 00s. These use thread more literally. Areas of stitching and tufting vie for attention with increasing use of very thick paint, applied horizontally and left to dry. These often include a duck or a swan like bird. 

!Neo Rauch.

German artist who makes paintings that have both figurative and abstract elements. The figures and buildings in Rauch’s are painted in a socialist realist style, but the are part of a larger, geometric abstract composition of coloured lines and shapes. The paintings are up to three metres high. 

!Tobias Rehberger.

German artist who makes site specific sculptures and models for these which are based on garden design and horticulture. Rehberger might for example make a modular planting unit in which he plants the crops grown in the area, for example maize, artichokes and sunflowers, and place this in a university concourse. Or he may reconstruct municipal flowerbeds and through the planting and shape of the beds echo a municipal building. 

!Steve Reinke.

Canadian artist who make video work. Reinke’s work 100 Short Videos, made in the mid 1990s, is just that – 100 short films made or found by Reinke, which include film of himself as a child, film of a group of children making a news broadcast at the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation and film of gay men meeting for sex in a forest. 

!Nick Relph and Oliver Payne.

British artists born in the late 1970s who make videos about urban culture, for example one about public toilets in London which combines music with a written narrative and poetry edited with images from footage they shot in public conveniences. 

!Jason Rhoades.

American artist. 

!Carol Rhodes.

British artist who makes small paintings of aerial landscapes, usually fairly ordinary areas such as airport terminals. 

!Pipilotti Rist.

Swiss artist who makes video installations. Rist, who used to be a musician, collages together still images, video footage and music, which she composes herself to make dream like sequences. She uses digital effects to create saturated colour, colour changes, dissolves, blurring, mirroring, and other optical effects. Rist’s videos sometimes feature herself. The films are non narrative and are looped. Rist employs a variety of means of presentation; double projections that meet in a corner for example. In one exhibition she provided a 2 metre high 4 metre long sofa for viewer to clamber on to and watch a video wearing headphones. 

!Matthew Ritchie.

American artist who makes work based on charts, graphs and plans. Ritchie makes large scale drawings, up to 5 metres long. An example of which is his diagram using circles around the names of individuals, corporations and institutions which are connected by arrows, showing the extent to which the US government and the family President Bush is linked to the oil business !Ugo Rondinone. Italian artist who makes circular target paintings with concentric circles in blurred colours that create an optical shimmer. 

!Eva Rothschild.

British artist born in the 1970s who makes sculpture and wall based work. Rothschild has made a large number of works by weaving together two contrasting wall posters, cutting them in to strips and reassembling them, turning two images into an abstracted third. She often leaves part of the image as unwoven strips which hang down the wall. Rothschild’s sculptures are minimal abstract objects which have the quality of small monuments. She made a work by placing hundreds of burning incense sticks into a rubber car tyre, juxtaposing the spiritual contemplation associated with the incense sticks with a reference to the burning necklace (a car tyre filled with petrol) placed round the necks of persecuted Buddhist monks in the far east. 

!Thomas Ruff.

German artist born in the 1960s who makes photographic portraits. These are head and shoulders images printed much larger than life size, the subject looking directly at the camera, expressionless. Every detail of skin and hair is in sharp focus. 

!Karin Ruggaber.

Brigit artist born in the 1960s who makes sculpture. Ruggaber takes elements of furniture and architectural fixtures and fittings and transforms them into minimal sculpture, for example a hand rail upholstered in leather effect vinyl. 

!Neil Rumming.

British artist born in the 1970s who makes large paintings up to 3 meters high and works on paper. Rumming juxtaposes imagery such as cross sections from medical books, tattoos, graphic design for rock band album covers, or graphic images of flames or flowers, for example, to make a complex abstract but decorative composition painted in hard edged bright acrylic colours. 

!John Russell.

British artist, formerly a member of Bank, who makes large scale representational paintings which are very messy and badly painted. Russell also makes performances. Art, artists and the art world are the subject of his often polemical work. Russell sometimes collaborates with Fabienne Audeoud. 

!Johannes Rust.

Austrian artist who made a film with Jonathan Faier !Anne Ryan. Irish artist born in the 1960s who makes cowboy paintings, each one based on a still from a Hollywood western. Ryan uses a palette of green grey and brown to depict men and horses in landscapes, or men in saloons. 

!Giorgio Sadotti.

British artist born in the 1960s who has made work in a variety of media and staged events. He arranged a dinner party for selected artists, dealers and curators at which the guests conversations were recorded. For a work entitled Be Me he sat in a gallery all day every day and invited anyone to come and take his place. 

!Jenny Saville.

British painter born in the late 1960s who makes monumental paintings, at least four metres high, of nude women and photographs. Saville’s subjects are often very large women and the subject of her work is really flesh. A painting will consist largely of expanses of painted flesh, onto which in the early years she inscribed text as if it were cut into the flesh. In the 1990s Saville made paintings of women lying on a sheet of glass so that their flesh squashed and distorted. 

!Kathy Schimert.

American artist born in the 1960s who makes installation, video and ceramic sculpture. Schimert made a film of a boy under water with wings on who represents drowned Icarus. 

!Andreas Schlaegel.

German artist born in the 1960s who make installation and sculpture. Schlaegel made a nude portrait from French fries, a sofa from washing up sponges and an arm chair from toilet rolls. He became an Elvis impersonator which he considered part of his practise as an artist. 

!Adrian Scrivener.

British artist born in the 1960s. 

!George Shaw.

British painter who makes small landscape paintings using shiny enamel paint which depict housing estates, garages, car parks and streets in suburbia. Shaw paints in a detailed and realistic way. 

!Jim Shaw.

American artist born in the 1950s who is best known for his collection known at the Thrift Store Paintings, an expanding collection of found art from which he select for exhibition, and the Dreams drawings, daily hand drawn records of his dream life, in the form of cartoon strips with text. The dreams very often feature art, artists, museums and dealers !Elsa Sighicelli. American artist born in the 1960s. 

!Roman Signer.

A German live artist who describes his works as sculptures, Signer is best known for works from the 1980s onwards. Signer’s materials are chiefly his own body, furniture, household and DIY objects and materials and explosives and his performances and actions are documented as short films and photographic sequences. They nearly always take place in a field or other natural environment. For example Signer stands on three boxes stacked one on the other in the middle of a field. Each box is rigged to explode in sequence. Signer remains standing as each one collapses, bringing him eventually to the ground. Something is placed in a stream, and the action of the running water eventually causes an explosive reaction. In both cases the resulting puffs of smoke is visually important to signer. He also used a bright orange ball in a number of works. Signer uses the formal language of sculpture, the body and the plinth, the landscape, and subverts it by adding the destructive power of explosives in a highly controlled way. The works seem slapstick and humorous but in fact they are precisely organised, even the puffs of smoke are carefully planned. Signer has also made some site specific firework displays. 

!DJ Simpson.

British artist born in the 1970s who make very large (at least 4 by 5 metre) machine carved panels. These are made as if they are abstract paintings. Simpson uses an electric router to gouge out channels to create lines, which loop and curve over the surface, as well as other tools that can inscribe the surface that he works on. He works on prepared and on found surfaces, such as laminate table tops, as well as building materials such as ply and silver insulation board, in fact any sheet material that is composed of layers so that the lines Simpson cuts out reveal the contrasting colours of the layer beneath ! Jane Simpson. British artist born in the 1960s who is best known for her ice sculptures, in which she uses refrigeration and ice as a construction tool and material. One of the earliest made in the early 1990s consists of two halves of a heart made from metal and brass sheet, the separated surfaces refrigerated and water added so that ice forms, sticking the heart back together. Another work from the same period is a small refrigerated metal shelf on which is placed a block of butter. These works are conditional – they only remain in their intended state as long as the refrigeration process is taking place. From the beginning of her career Simpson has also had an interest in vessels and containers, starting with a collection of Tupperware, which she displayed in vitrines, and photographed, the photographs enabling the plastic mass manufactured containers to transcend their reality and appear far more precious. In 2000 Simpson began a series of works in which she modelled vessels depicted in paintings, for example those in Morandi paintings, casting these in rubber, and later making them from scratch in glazed porcelain. These vessels are exhibited in groups on shelves and plinths. This interest in functional mass produced containers led Simpson to begin to cast similar containers in rubber, and then to cast furniture, leading to a series of floppy furniture works. Simpson cast stools, chairs, tables and sideboards in rubber, creating objects that absolutely refuse their function and flop in a heap on the floor almost seeming to be more like curled up or collapsed four legged animals. There is an abject side to Simpson’s work, which is contrasted with the grandeur of ambition in some of the ice sculptures. An antique sideboard is cast in plaster and its top refrigerated, inviting contemplation of the function of such a piece of furniture, and highlighting the appearance of a layer of ice as a decorative surface. A structure somewhat like a cross between double sided train seat, a fountain but chiefly resembling a urinal, has steel sides curving down into a trough. These are refrigerated and the water flow is continuously frozen. These transitional works marking the beginning of a series of works in which Simpson refrigerated already existing objects, often in situ, in order to explore the qualities of ice as a decorative surface. These works include a refrigerated chandelier and ornate cast iron gates. 

!Daniel Sinsel.

German artist who paints watercolours depicting young men and boys often naked or engaged in sex acts. The figures are often shown in rural landscapes. There is an idyllic atmosphere yet the figures in the paintings are clearly contemporary. Sense’s medium is traditionally associated with art of the past, with amateur art or with graphic art and illustration gives the images an ironically innocent quality. 

!Smith and Stewart.

Artist partners, born around 1970, who made a number of performative video works before turning to installation. Kiss is a video in which one partner covers the other with red lipstick kisses until there is no skin left untouched. The gesture of covering someone with kisses becomes sinister as the flesh begins to take on the appearance of having been beaten, bruised or flayed. In another work one partner is submerged in a bath, and the other periodically place their face into the water and breathes air into the submerged partners mouth enabling them to stay submerged. These simple acts of partnership, intimacy and trust have violence and control as their counterpoint. Smith and Stewart moved on to investigate ideas about control and implicit violence, for example in an installation made in 2003. This consisted of a 29 metre long 4 meter high breezeblock wall constructed diagonally across the gallery, not meeting the wall at either end. On one side of the wall the gallery was empty and dark. On the other side the space was also dark but a chair, various amplifiers speakers and cables could be seen. Projected onto the brick wall is a film of a hand covered in a black round shape, its surface bound with layers of shiny black plastic tape, knocking against a wooden board leaning against the wall. The film is made on the actual wall at the actual place where it is projected, leading to a double take in the viewers mind about what is real (the board is not really there). The lights turn on and off apparently in a random fashion. They are pendant light bulbs. The scene becomes sinister, the knocking like the sound of some possible torture or unspecified but unpleasant event. 

!Bob and Roberta Smith.

The pseudonym of British artist Patrick Brill, born in around 1960. Roberta is in fact the name of his sister, but he does not work with her. Brill makes painting, sculpture and installation using basic materials such as house paint, cement, clay, and timber. He has also made participatory works, inviting visitors to use clay provided to add to his collection of clay vegetables. His work draws attention to the role of the artist, the status of the art object and the role of the viewer through the copious use of hand painted text, and knowingly clumsy modes of construction. The text is always capitalised, painted in bright colours, a different colour for each letter, on a white background. Brill’s work is socially engaged in the sense that he acknowledges that the viewer is not to be deceived by art, also questioning the legitimising role played by commercial success and highlighting the mundane reality of most artists lives. He portrays himself as a fallen hero, a failed romantic busy with the gritty reality of the important job of the artist. Brill operates a kind of grass roots art politics, often creating events or action accompanied by promotional material and badges. An example is his 2002 initiation to all artists to bring their old work to be destroyed in a massive purgative action. His hand painted slogans are a feature of these, and by the 2000s these became the predominant form of his work. 

!Brigit Smith.

British artist born in the 1960s. 

!Kerry Smith.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes moulded painted fibreglass figurative sculpture. She has made a pregnant school girl holding out her hand in the style of a charity collection box, and small girl who is fixed to project horizontally form the wall just about floor level. 

!Pierrick Sorin.

French artist who makes work about knowledge and information, including a film in which he purports to be an expert explaining theories wit the aid of a white board, which he is fact making up as he goes along. 

!John Spiteri.

Australian artist who makes figurative paintings and autobiographical videos. In the videos he challenges himself alone with the camera. The videos are usually a response to a song and a location. For example in one film set in a bathroom Spiteri sings a rap song so fast that it is barely believable. It seems clear that this is a film that has been speeded up, but in fact Spiteri has practised until he could do it perfectly. In others, he samples a part of a song and uses this as the soundtrack for a self interrogation, in which he faces the camera and talks to it, such as I Can’t Do That, a film based on a sample from a song by the pop singer Cher in which Spiteri is seen regarding himself in a mirror repeating ‘I can’t do that’ in a litany to hopelessness. The alter ego that Spiteri has created for his work is a blend of a character who is not very good at life but is extremely good at the tasks carried out in the films. Spiteri has also made small detailed narrative paintings that seem to be illustrations for a 1950s children’s story. These are painted in enamel paint in bright colours. Spiteri has made a video of each painting that adds a narrative, consisting of an overheard conversation. Since 2000 Spiteri has been making oil paintings. 

!Fergal Stapleton.

British artist born around 1970. 

!Frances Stark.

American artist born in the 1960s who uses a variety of media. Stark also writes as part of her practise. Her book The Architect and the Housewife is about her practise as an artist and the difficulty of making art at home. Stark ahs made a series of videos of her cats at home in her apartment. She also makes sculptures, including one of a small Perspex grandfather clock. Stark makes quantities of drawings, fro example her text drawings made using carbon paper which feature a word or a number of words written out in rows each row being added to. The low tech transfer quality gives this work an ephemeral quality. 

!Simon Starling.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes sculpture by turning one thing into another. For example a bible into a chair – Starling will dismantle the bicycle, strip it down, grind, melt and otherwise reduce it to its constituents which he then recasts as another object entirely. Pursuing his interest into how one thing can be made into another, Starling has also made a group of works, which are based on United Nations blueprints for agricultural implements. These are instructions in how to make essential implements from freely available materials, such as oil cans, bicycle parts, and pipes. Starling constructs these fully functioning implements such as ploughs, harvesters and irrigators, often painting them, and displays them as sculpture. 

!Georgina Starr.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes video and installation art. Starr creates a variety of personas and worlds and weave a fiction around herself that is sometimes quite like a children’s story. One installation in the early 1990s created a fairy tale or cartoon like environment in which the viewer could wander. In 1999 she made the Bunny Lakes trilogy, a multi part work about teenage girls from a place called Bunny Lakes, based on a true story. Starr’s earliest works were very simple. Crying, a video, shows Starr bursting into tears and crying sitting in front of the camera. Another is a record on which a whistled tune is recorded. The tune was made by chance composition – Starr threw torn pieces of paper in the air, noted where they fell and translated this spacing into musical notation. 

!Jemima Stehli.

British artist born in 1962, Stehli makes photographic work centring on her own body. Stehli began as a sculptor whose early works included scarves several metres long knitted on very large diameter needles, which were presented folded on the floor, and wool embroidered padded panels, around sixty cm long featuring words. In the early 1990s Stehli began to make resin casts of isolated parts of her own body, such as a hand complete with watch or a breast, moving on to making casts of vessels and bottles which she presented in groups, and objects such as a purse or a tray. These small domestic scaled sculptures are lacquered and highly polished, often in deep reds, blues and black. Stehli made a performance work for which she lay naked except for a pair of high heeled shoes motionless on the floor of a gallery, titled Shoes Chosen by the Curator in the mid 1990s. She presented her own body as a sculpture and documented this by photographing it. This led her to make a series of photographs of herself naked. Stele’s photographic work since this point has concentrated on the relation of the viewer to the female body. She made two groups of images that alluded to bondage, in which parts of her body appear naked, the cable release of the camera highly visible. One group of photographs is black, in deep shadow; the other is white and bright. She then made a series based on the work of the 60s artist Allen Jones. Stehli recreated Jones’ famous fibreglass sculptures of women in high heels and underwear acting as the support for glass table tops or stools, photographing herself recreating the poses, without the underwear but with the shoes. The photographs are printed so that she appears life size, in black and white. Stehli work has sometimes involved other people. She invited women to be photographed by her naked, with herself also in the photograph. She then made what has become her best known work a group of photographs taken by men. She invited a number of curators and critics to come to her studio and be photographed sitting or standing as she faced them and removed her clothes except for a pair of high heels. The image is composed to show her back view in the foreground and the man looking outwards. Some of the men are looking at Stehli, some at the camera, some elsewhere. The men hold the cable release. A series of works based on a particular photograph of Helmut Newton’s followed. Stehli recreated Newton’s black and white image of four fashion models standing naked staring at the camera in her studio, placing herself to the far side of the image, leaving space where the others are in the Newton original, on a white photographic backdrop. She stands in the exact pose of the original, naked in one photograph and clothed in jeans and a t shirt in the other, in both cases holding the cable release, the cable trailing in from the camera at the bottom of the image. A number of works made on this basis included a series based on the paintings of Francis Bacon. For these colour photographs Stehli moves in front of the camera set on a long exposure. The result is a blurred image of intense colour, distorting features and body parts in the same way that Bacon does. In a similar series she uses a red silk scarf moving it around her body so that the red blurs and makes a virtually abstract image. Since 2000 Stehli has made images in which she is increasingly absent. A series of self portraits in her studio show her often lying on the ground at odd angles to the camera, her gaze not directed at the viewer. 

!Myra Stimson.

British artist born in the 1960s who make paintings. Stimson's early work was figurative. In 2000 she made a series of paintings in which she reproduced shopping lists she had found in a supermarket. 

!Jessica Stockholder.

American sculptor born in the 1960s who makes very large installations. Stockholders early work consisted of small assemblages of timber, carpet, household objects, wool and fabric. She began to make larger works – a transitional work consisted of painting areas of a garden shed, including painting the side it blue, extending the colour over the grass in front of the shed. A similar work involved a painted mattress. Stockholder’s mature work consists of much larger scale site specific installations. These are described by her as paintings and are often based on landscapes or still lives, for example by Cézanne. The installations are large sprawling constructions, often emerging from or including in their structure a partial demolition of the gallery wall. They appear like unfinished construction work which has a life of its own. Stockholder uses lengths of timber and board, or spreads items and material over the floor to build an environment, which is transparent, can be walked through and around, and which presents multiple views according to the angle from which they are observed. She adds flat planes in the form of sheet material, transparent lighting gels, fabric and carpet, and then paints certain areas. She uses light in the form of light bulbs in holders, and has also added miniature fans to create movement. In one installation a row of oranges sits on a shelf. In another a large carpet twists as if it is flying and has collided with the installation. Paint, timber and rope spill onto and extend over the floor. One work is made from a bank of baths, arranged in rows then cut into with a blowtorch and painted, the orange paint extending right across the floor. Another work uses a number of refrigerators arranged in a wall like structure. A work made from a large pink sheet of plastic pulled up at various points by wires attached to the ceiling ahs a long title including the words ‘big rock candy mountain’. Most of stockholders works have very long impenetrable titles that seem as though they may explain the work but in fact do not. 

!Tim Stoner.

British artist born in the 1970s who makes figurative paintings of people and groups of people. Stoner paints figures in silhouette with a halo of light behind them and adds a light coloured layer of paint, which serves to blur the image so that it appears as if it is viewed against the sun. 

!Thomas Struth.

German artist who makes photographic portraits, landscapes and interiors characterised by their apparent stillness as if time has stood still. 

!Michael Stubbs.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes paintings and sculpture about painting, for example his squashed canvases. These are wall mounted works consisting of several small square canvases about fifty cm square sandwiched together with very thick layers of oil paint in a variety of colours. These are bolted together through the stretchers so that the paint is squeezed out all around the edges, giving the impression that there are several hidden paintings. The whole object is mounted on the wall, the top canvas blank. 

!Daniel Sturgis.

British painter born in the 1960s who makes brightly coloured hard edged pattern paintings based on flowers. 

!Hiroshi Sugimoto.

Japanese photographer who makes photographs of a variety of subjects, often focussing on representing light, as for example in an number of works showing the light from candles. 

!Ricky Swallow.

Australian artist born around 1970 who makes sculpture, for example a group of works made using record turntables as their base, on which Swallow placed model making figures and constructed space ships and other futuristic vehicles, habituations and buildings, incorporating the parts of the record player in to the whole. Some of the sculptures make use of the spinning of the turntable or the movement of the needle arm. The whole sculpture is sprayed with grey paint and presents a very convincing and ultimately unnerving scene from a future envisaged by swallow. 

!Sarah Sze.

American artist born in the 1960s who makes site specific installations in which she arranges a vast amount of objects and materials over an entire room and its walls and ceiling. Sze chooses discarded materials, plastic bottles, cotton buds, cable, wire, paper, mass produced plastic vessels, toys, beads, sugar, glitter and hundreds of other items and materials and deploys them in a formal abstract composition also choosing to paint the walls, taking into account their form and colour. The vast scale of the undertaking is part of the effect of the work producing an effect of visual satiety in the viewer. 

!Neal Tait.

British painter born in the 1960s who makes relatively small paintings sometimes semi abstract, sometimes depicting objects. He paints in a loose gestural style. 

!Tomoko Takahashi.

British artist who makes large scale installations from discarded furniture and junk. An early work in a gallery basement seemed at first sight not to be art but to be simply an excessively untidy storeroom that had perhaps been burgled. Takahashi has made numerous gallery installations; one consists of office furniture and equipment, which is strewn over the space in apparent chaos. In fact the arrangement is deliberate and painstaking. Filing cabinets, cupboards, desks, chairs, computers, pens, telephones, faxes, lamps, kettles, lengths of electric cable and just about anything that might be found in a modern office are arranged to look as if a cataclysmic event has taken place, perhaps an earthquake, a search by government agents, creating a sense of unease. The destruction of an everyday environment on such a grand scale underlines the temporality and built in in obsolescence of our surroundings. Takahashi has also make a website called Word Perhect which is a hand drawn and written interface in which the viewer can select from a variety of notes, post its, scraps of paper and jottings on the back of envelopes and paper bags found in the artists studio and add read her comments about the contents. The reader can type on the interface and on the notes in a font based on Takahashi’s handwriting. 

!Sam Taylor Wood.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes photographic and video work. Taylor Wood is one of a number of artists who emerged in the early 1990s who are known as young British artists or YBAs. One of Taylor Wood’s early works, Brontosaurus, is a video of a young man dancing to disco music, naked, swinging and flapping his penis energetically in the process. Another early work is a four screen video projection showing four opera singers performing La Boheme. The screens on which they appear are placed in a box shape, creating the sense that they are in a room which the viewer has entered, and that they are singing together. It becomes apparent that the films were shot separately and the singers are singing together but not together. A similar work, showing a couple having a row in a kitchen, is projected onto the walls in a corner, one showing the man and one the woman. The frame is composed so that it appears that one half of the kitchen, in which the man stands, is on one wall and the other half, in which the woman stands, is on the other. This gives the illusion that the space in which the filmed event is taking place has been partly reconstructed. It becomes clear that the row is in fact performed by actors who are not in the room at the same time. In the late 1990s Taylor Wood began to take panoramic photographs using a camera, which is set on a slowly revolving tripod. This enabled her to take a 360 degree view of a room and its occupants. She choreographed a series of group portraits featuring people she knew, taking place in borrowed apartments and other places. The long duration of the exposure made it possible for some of the subjects appear twice in the photograph. These colour photographs are about 3 metres long. Taylor wood has also made a large number of conventional photographs including landscapes portraits and self portraits. One shows her sitting on the steps of a building holding a young man, who is limp in her arms, a reference to paintings of the Virgin Mary holding Jesus. 

!Juergen Teller.

British artist, formerly a fashion photographer, who has made work about the fashion world, including photographing hopeful models at the moment the door of the agency is opened, a group of images relating to Bertolt Brecht’s life in Berlin and the city after the wall and autobiographical work. He photographed a frozen dead dog sticking out of a refuse bin. 

!Kathy Temin.

Australian artist born in the 1960s who makes photographic, video and installation work, centring on the creation of domestic interior spaces in the gallery, fashion and fetishism. Temin made an installation of Polystyrene room dividers crudely cut out in a 1960’s lattice pattern. She has made a variety of deliberately clumsily fashioned models of dwellings and spaces, and well made domestic items such as lamps and furniture. Temin also made a video documentation of two people dressed in koala suits, and has done work about shoe fetishism and celebrity. 

!Thomson and Craighead.

British artists born in the 1960s who work together. 

!David Thorpe.

British artist born in the late 1960s who makes complex collages from coloured paper, as well as specialist paper such as bark paper. Thorpe’s early works are based on photographs of 1960s and 70s modernist buildings, seen by day and by night. The image is built up from layers of paper cut to match the graduations of colour on the original. A night view of a house high on a hill is made from a great range of dark blue, grey and black paper, with bright orange for the illuminated windows, in which tiny black silhouetted figures are seen. Thorpe’s views of modernist architectural ideals led him to begin to create images and to illustrate a Utopian vision. The collages began to depict invented buildings with symbolic overall structural design. He also designed an indoor planter which consisted several levels of mirrored glass, a small water feature and meadow plants. 

!Matthew Tickle.

British artist born in the 1960s. 

!Wolfgang Tillmans.

German artist born in the 1960s who makes photographic images of everyday objects and interiors, people, still lives, and abstract images made in the darkroom. Tillmans, formerly a fashion photographer, pioneered the influential everyday life, snapshot style of fashion photography that are so characteristic of the 1990s in Britain. Tillmans always exhibits his work in groups, unframed, pinned to the wall, printed in various sizes from postcard size to three metres high. The images are produced as inkjet prints. The groups are not usually obviously related in terms of subject matter but are formally related (there are exceptions such as a collection of re photographed images of young soldiers cut from newspapers). Thus an image of Kate Moss, a fashion model, might be placed next to one of some socks drying on a radiator, a naked man, some rotting fruit and an ashtray, a landscape. The images might be intimate or observational, and Tillmans’ work covers the range of categories including still life, landscape, cityscape, skyscraper, group and single portraiture. He photographs what is close to him and does not set out to find locations or subjects. A particularly well known image from the 1990s is of two friends sitting on a branch of a tree, naked except for raincoats and boots. Sometimes Tillmans returns to a subject repeatedly, most famously in his work Concorde, a collection of photographs, also published as a book, of the aircraft in flight made over a period of weeks mostly at Heathrow airport where the plane spotters gather. In 2000 Tillmans began to make more abstract images, using darkroom techniques and dyes to make colour images for example a pool of blurred red colour on a white ground that seems like a rose so that the connection with painting in his work, which has always been present, has become more obvious. 

!Padraig Timoney.

British artist born in the 1960s. 

!Mark Titchener.

British artist born in the 1960s. 

!Rirkrit Tiravanija.

Thai artist known for his installations that are constructed to be social environments. Tivrana became known in the 1990s for his noodle bar, which he designed and built from ply and timber as counter with seating, where he cooked and served bowls of noodles to viewers. This is an idea which he has developed and which has taken place in a variety of locations and forms. 

!Grazia Toderi.

Italian artist who made a digital video collage in which a model of a satellite is seen apparently floating in zero gravity inside a space consisting of a curved ceiling decorated with plaster relief which is digitally doubled to create a vault like space. 

!Fred Tomaselli.

American artist who has made a number of works mixing painting and drawing with collage, which characteristically feature patterns made by placing dried leaves and flowers under a thick layer of poured resin. 

!Chris Tosic.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes paintings, drawings and sculpture. In 2003 Tosic made a work consisting of a group of heads carved on the end of pencils. 

!Gavin Turk.

British artist born around 1960 who is known for his work in mixed media centring on his signature and the idea of authorship. An early work of Turks is a men’s urinal signed by him and placed on a plinth. This work is a copy of a work by Marcel Duchamp. Turk has made a variety of paintings of his own signature, something which is usually a tiny detail in the history of painting yet very important in terms of authentication and therefore of value. Turk has painted his signature in oil paint, screen printed it and made a relief from polystyrene balls. Perhaps Turks best known work is a life size wax work of Turk dressed as Johnny Rotten in the pose of Elvis Presley. He later made a waxwork of himself as a person living on the streets, with filthy skin dressed in ragged clothes and shoes. A companion work is an empty sleeping bag. 

!James Turrell.

American artist who makes large scale installations, either in museum, on selected outdoor sites, or to commission. Turrell combines architectural structures with natural or artificial light to create visual tricks that give the illusion of a depth or height that isn’t there, of to focus the viewers vision on the sky. An example is a gallery installation, which consists of a dark room in which there seems to be a red glowing wall panel, which seems to have some kind of activity on its surface. It is only when the viewer steps right up the apparent panel that it can be discerned that there is a rectangle panel cut out of the wall, behind which is a void which is lit with red light, and in fact there is nothing there. Another gallery installation is made by making window where no window is expected so that the viewer is fooled into thinking that there is a sky coloured panel on the ceiling when in fact it is the sky. Turrell's outdoor installations are sometimes very large scale. His observatory is a sunken earth work at the top of a specially constructed mound that is designed to harness the changing light for that geographic location at all times of year to create effects fro the viewer inside the work. The viewer’s view of the sky is controlled by the structure of the space that Turrell has designed for the observatory. 

!Luc Tuymans.

German painter born in the 1950s who makes a large number of paintings nearly always the same size about 80 by 50 cm. Tuymans’ uses a sparse palette of subdued colours, rarely mixing colours, but using a range of tones of one or two colours in each work. His paintings are very simple representations of everyday subjects such as the pattern on wallpaper, flowers, furniture and objects. He has been very influential for a generation of artists. 

!Keith Tyson.

British artist who makes installations and drawings. Tyson become known in the 1990s for his Artmachine, a sculpture that produced random artworks the description of which would be ejected from the machine on a card. Tyson would then construct the artwork. One installation consisted of a whole gallery filled by these art works linked by cables. The artworks usually juxtapose household, found objects and building materials in unlikely combinations and sometimes have a kinetic or sound feature. His interest in multiplication of ideas is always documented in his prolific drawing practise. Tyson produces drawings often with text which address any number of scientific or eccentric inventions, everyday objects, astronomy, geography, physics and chemistry. Typically these drawings are always the same size, 120 cm by 80 cm, but Tyson also produces much larger paintings. Tyson also produced a black monolithic sculpture which emits a low hum as if it is a powerful minimal futuristic machine of some sort. 

!Udomski.

Artist who makes large paintings up to 3 metres high by cutting out single letters from newspapers and magazines, sticking them onto the canvas and painting around them. The resulting dense pattern, perhaps of the letter ‘O’ in upper and lower case hundreds of times painted around with very dark brown paint, gives the impression of a pattern o dots. 

!Piotr Uklansky.

Polish artist born in the 1960s living in America who works in a variety of media. One of Uklansky best known works is a nightclub dance floor made from squares of coloured plastic illuminated from below, which he has installed in a number of galleries and which is permanently installed in a bar in New York. Uklansky has made other floor works, including a puddle of a certain amount of water poured onto the floor, and a floor skating drawing, black rubber marks made by the artist’s shoes when he ice skated on a gallery floor. Uklansky has an interest in the ephemeral and the unnoticed. An early work consisted of a number of printed colour advertising flyers, which in fact advertised nothing sensible, pushed through the door of the gallery and the surrounding area as if they were junk mail. Uklanksy also makes photographic work. Nazis is about 40 head and shoulders photographs of actors playing Nazi soldiers in cinema films. 

!Jeffrey Vallance.

American artist born in the 1950s who makes installation work and writes extensively about art both as part of his practise and as a critic. Vallance lives in Las Vegas where he has established The Liberace Museum to house a collection of memorabilia and artefacts related to the pianist. This is in part ironic and in part a genuine tribute. Vallance travels widely and part of his practise is an ethnographic investigation into the sacred objects of other cultures. Vallance has made a body of work that investigates the religious relic, making relics of his own and investigating existing ones. He made a Shroud by covering his face with coffee and imprinting it on a cloth. He shows that the images on the Turin Shroud are in fact images of nuclear mushroom clouds and explains why he thinks this is the case. He adopts a frozen chicken, calls it Binky and shows that it can be resurrected after death inn the manner of Jesus. He researched in detail the whereabouts of the various relics of nails and wooden shards of the True Cross and wrote about them. Vallance travelled to Tonga. Before he left he corresponded with the King and asked him what gift he would like. The king requested a pair of size thirteen snorkelling fins which Vallance provided. The correspondence is published. 

!Lily Van der Stokker.

Dutch artist born in the 1950s who makes wall paintings, screen prints, and self adhesive stickers. Van der Stokker’s paintings are usually made with accompanying especially made or upholstered furniture. The paintings consist of flowers and other decorative elements linked by curling lines, with a few words of text, for example ‘Lily is 43 years old and Jack is 62 years old’, which surrounds a two sweater sofa with a pale beige covering. Self adhesive stickers might be designed to be applied to a wall where it meets the floor. A screen print has an orange green and white plaid pattern on which is a bunch of flowers with the words Thank You. Van der Stokker’s painting is usually in pastel and pretty colours, painted precisely by hand with hard edges. Any text is usually in a hand writing style of lettering. 

!Julie Verhoeven.

Artist who makes pencil drawings of women with text that take the style fashion drawings. Verhoeven is also a fashion designer. 

!Bill Viola.

America artist working in Video born in the 1950s who came to prominence in the 1990s. Viola marries an interest in the representation of the human form in sculpture with a fascination for and skill in video technology. Early works include an arrangement of different sized monitors from the tiniest one inch square to the more usual domestic size, removed from their casings, strewn on floor or in on work on a shelf. On the monitors films of different parts of the artists body like his ear, the crook of arm or the side of his neck. It is as if the monitors represent a fragmented body, making a comment on the possibility for classical figurative sculpture in the age of video. Also a work installed in a corridor shaped room. When the viewer enters the room and walks down it they trigger back projected videos installed behind the false walls. Each one projects a person who appears to walk towards the viewer from the far distances, getting gradually larger until they are life size and stand, facing the viewer confronting them. Viola used non artist as models and asked them merely to confront the camera. The work has a spooky quality and leaves the viewer with an erroneous sense of control. Violas best known work is a triptych large screen video projection showing his partner giving birth to their child, his mother dying and himself apparently drowning underwater. Simultaneously projected with a breathing/water soundtrack, the work draws obvious parallels between birth and death, birth and being underwater, death and being underwater. This work has a powerful impact not least because it features an actual birth and death. The work hailed as a religious masterpiece fro the 20th century. Continuing his investigation of the sculptural representation of the human from Viola has since gone on to make a series of works on smaller wall mounted plasma screens. These works take famous paintings often old masters or renaissance works and recreate them in modern settings using actors and highly controlled lighting. Although they are video and therefore exist in time they appear static and little happens, therefore they can be read as paintings. In 2003 Viola made a work titled The Passion. 

!Sophie Von Hellerman.

British painter who makes loosely painted images of scenes or events that imply narrative, or appear to have a literary reference. Hellerman paints with great economy, using the minimum brushwork required to produce dreamlike, hazy images. The figures in her paintings often appear as if they are on a stage because most of the canvas is left bare, the thin paint soaked into the canvas. 

!Inez Van Lamsweerde.

Dutch artist who makes digitally manipulated images, drawing on her experience in fashion photography. Her highly glossy stylised portraits engender a sense of unease in the viewer. A beautiful blonde reclining in a swimsuit has male arms, a smiling male model has female hands created by digital alteration that is so skilful as to be initially imperceptible. 

!Jessica Voorsanger.

British artist born in the late 1960s whose work is concerned with the mentality of the fan. Her video and photographic work often has a participatory or collaborative element – she may invite answers to questionnaires, or include peoples responses in her own work. Voorsanger has made a number of works about being a David Cassidy fan and about being a football fan. Voorsanger has a web site that is integral to her practise. 

!Jeff Wall.

Makes very large scale photographic works, usually presented on light boxes. Wall remakes works from art history including Hokusai's ‘Wave’, interpreting the works into a modern setting. The wave is a group of people on a dyke casing paper blown into the air by the wind. He made a work showing dying and wounded men in mud of a battlefield. The works are recreated in the most painstaking manner to ensure absolute apparent veracity and accuracy, and photographed in larger format to ensure the sharpest highest quality image. It is difficult to fault the quality of the production. 

!Mark Wallinger.

British artist born around 1960 who has made work in a wide range of media. Wallinger’s practise includes video, sculpture, photography and painting. There is a strong socio historical aspect to his work and he is interested in football, horse racing and religion. Wallinger’s early works are mostly sculpture. He placed a table football game on dark green marbled plinth, made a tapestry of Munch’s painting The Scream and made a work with a bird in a cage. Another football work is a photo of Wallinger in the crowd leaving Highbury, a London football ground, carrying a banner bearing some significant words. He made a series of full length portraits of his friends presented as if they were homeless people. One of Wallinger’s early videos was a comparison between the television coverage of the opening of racing at Ascot by the Queen on three successive years. This is played simultaneously on three separate monitors and shows that the camera angles, shots, and commentary varies very little. Wallinger has made many works about horse racing. He made a number of almost life size paintings of horses in the style of Stubbs. Each horse is seen in profile, standing with no saddle or bridle, on a dark green background. They are painted very realistically, and composed from the front half of one parent and the rear half of the other, joined in the middle across the body. In the late 1990s Wallinger and a syndicate purchased and began to race a horse named A Real Work of Art. Wallinger has also made a number of works about religion. One features himself carrying a blind person’s white stick walking down an upwards escalator chanting the lords prayer which is played backwards. Wallinger contributed a proposal for the empty sculpture plinth in Trafalgar Square in London. Ecce Homo, a one metre high statue of a naked man (who could be a Christ figure) is made in white marble and stands on one corner of the plinth close to the edge looking outwards. 

!Rebecca Warren.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes sculptures from clay, ceramic and bronze. Warren models human figures very roughly, using lumps of clay barely fashioned, the surface not smoothed at all. Figures are sometimes engaged in sexual acts. Female forms are large breasted and monumental and male forms have oversized penises. The clay is usually left unglazed, sometimes and the sculpture is presented on a plinth. They range in size from life size down to table top size. Warren has made a series of large sculptures which are homage to both the cartoonist Robert Crumb and the painter Philip Guston (who was himself influenced by Crumb). Each one is a Crumb style figure (with an enormously exaggerated bottom) combined with elements of the work of a famous artist from history. Warren has also made works in bronze, sometimes consisting of no more than a lump or a phallic object. 

!Gillian Wearing.

British artist born in the 1960s whose work in a variety of media deals with identity. Wearing’s earliest work to gain popularity is called Dancing In Peckham, a video of herself with a personal stereo dancing in the middle of a busy shopping centre. She also walked around her local streets with her entire head bandaged, noting the comments and attitudes that she attracted. Signs That Say What You Want Them to Say, is a video and a series of photographs. Wearing asked people on the street to write down, on a piece of paper that she gave them, something that they would like to say but never had. She then photographed them holding the sign in front of them. The resulting contrast between the expressed desire or emotion and the authors face is subject of the work. Continuing her exploration of how people see themselves, Wearing made a video of herself in bed with a number of transsexuals and transvestites, and a single shot video of a local police force, standing in rows. The officers remain motionless and so does the camera, so that what is a moving image becomes almost a still image. Individual movements, blinking, and any tics assume the same importance as gesture and facial expression in their absence. In 2003 Wearing made an number of photographs of herself dressed as members of her own family, using masks, prosthetics, wigs and make up. 

!Gary Webb.

British artist born in the 1970s who makes abstract sculptures from a variety of building and fabrication materials, plastic, acrylic, blown glass, laminate, rubber, metal and fibreglass. Webb’s sculptures sometimes have an audio addition, piece of music, sound or a song emanating from part of the sculpture. Webb draws on the legacy of 1960s and 70s sculptors like Antony Caro and David Smith, but his choice of materials is fundamentally different since he chooses more fragile or delicate materials. An early work consists of a small wood veneered unit on legs with music coming from it and a plume of wood veneer. Another consist of an amorphous giant pebble form lacquered in bright yellow high gloss paint with various other elements. Webb used representative objects in some of his early work, such as a black skinned female doll attached to a sphere and decorated. There are often references to furniture, for example the coffee table is a favourite form. Sometimes a specially made blown glass element is added. Webb has made moulded rubber floor tiles as part of another sculpture. Webb’s sculptures have the look of giant three dimensional collages of abstract elements that are brought together formally in the manner of traditional sculpture but do not share this appearance. 

!Nicole Wermers.

German artist born around 1970 who makes collages. 

!Franz West.

German artist who makes sculpture and installation and works on paper. West’s work generally features furniture, papier maché timber and plaster or bronze ‘lumps’ and painted collage. A sausage, turd or penis form appears frequently in his work whether made in papier maché, cast in bronze or painted into collages. West has a democratic approach to art, believing that an art objects value is created as much by the viewing subject as by the artist. To this end most of his sculpture is made to be touched or sat on. West is probably best known for his interactive sculptures. These are ungainly white plaster objects, organic amorphous white shapes that sit awkwardly on a plinth and look like joke sculptures. The viewer is instructed on the label accompanying the work to pick up the object and interact with it. There may be a video monitor showing a number of people doing this. A curtained off area with floor to ceiling mirror may be provided, and the viewer invited to enter with the sculpture and interact with it. Some of the sculptures have wire extrusions enabling them to be ‘worn’, or areas which allow then to be balanced on a shoulder. The interactive sculptures each have a specific plinth, which may incorporate a mirror, or a seat and in on case a bed on which the viewer can lie with the sculpture. West has made a large number of items of furniture, on which the viewer is free to sit or lounge. In particular he makes chairs and sofas, simple square shapes with unconventionally deep and wide seats. The furniture is made from unfinished steel concrete reinforcing rods with thin cushions upholstered in utilitarian materials such as canvas, sacking and silver insulation fabric. The furniture is sometimes placed in direct relation to a sculpture, for example a chair with a Hessian cushion is placed near to a pink papier maché lump which is hung from the ceiling. Or a pair of chairs with silver cushions are placed with a one and a half meter high sphere covered with brown parcel tape between them. The furniture is designed to involve the viewer physically in West’s work, to provoke thoughts about the idea of contemplation of art works. Through his large number of lump sculptures West investigates the idea of the autonomous and intrinsically valuable art objects. He create essentially lumpen abstract objects that could be said to be ugly and presents then in the same way that any sculpture would be shown. The lumps range in size from around fifty cm high to two metres high and more. They are made in papier maché on a plaster and timber frame work, sometimes with a gap left through which the inside can be viewed, and painted. They are also made in bronze, cast from papier maché originals and painted often in pink or pale blue, sometimes multicoloured. The forms of the lumps seem arbitrary although West has made a series of lump portrait heads. The phallic objects which West deploys in his work a sausage, penis or turd shape appear as sculpture made from papier maché, bronze or resin. Some are fabricated in sheet steel, cut in pieces and welded together in a patchwork. These are painted in colours that seem inappropriate to the form and material such as pale pink and blue, ochre or gold. West has made sculpture in this form in sizes ranging from 30 cm long to 20 metres long outdoor sculpture. The phallic shape appears in West’s collages frequently. These consist of magazine cut outs usually of men and women, which are painted over in poster paint to alter their body shape. They often feature half obscured sexual acts. West adds sausages cut from magazine advertisements emerging from a man or woman’s mouth, or from a man’s trousers. 

!Martin Westwood.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes mixed media wall work using collage, drawing, painting and papier maché. Westwood often makes silhouette cut outs and uses spray paint over these or through doilies to create shadow effects. In general his work is wall based, but he has also made installations, for example one in which he hung a number of papier maché forms made over balloons, which he had painted, collaged and drawn on. Westwood often chooses unconventional paper for his drawings, such as newsprint, or printed material. 

!Rachel Whiteread.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes large scale sculpture. Whiteread casts the interior and the underneath of buildings, rooms and furniture in concrete, plaster, rubber and resin, making a solid form from negative space. She began by casting mattresses in rubber and translucent silicon around 1990. these solid forms were placed on the floor half bent to lean against the wall. She also cast a bath, producing a solid block with a negative bath shape set into it which looks like a sarcophagus. A basin done in the same way, and some tables and desks which are simply the solid blocks produced from the space under a table. Whiteread’s first major work is Ghost, 1993, a cast of a room in a house. This work appears as a life sized plaster block (made in sections) which has the impressions of the details of the room on its surface. For example a fireplace projects from the surface instead of being cut into the wall, door and window frames which are negatives set into the surface, as are door handles, skirting board and light switches. Whiteread continued to make smaller objects, and in 1997 she made House, her best known work and one which became notorious. House was the cast of the interior of a two storey Victorian terraced house in the east end of London. The cast was made by spraying the interior with concrete and reinforcing it, then demolishing the exterior carefully. The row of houses was condemned and was to be demolished to make way for a new park so Whiteread’s work was to be temporary. However it was so popular that there were calls for it to remain as a permanent public sculpture in the park. There ensued a long public battle between arts bodies and the local authority with press and local residents both for and against the sculpture. The sculpture was finally demolished. Whiteread was commissioned to make a holocaust memorial for Vienna. Her cast of the interior of a library sited in a pedestrian square was finally unveiled in 2001 after several years of wrangling between commissioning bodies, public bodies and the authorities. The library is a cement block with the spines of books covering it. These ‘books’ are removable, each representing a person from that city who died in the holocaust. Whiteread has continued to cast furniture throughout her career. She began to use acrylic resin at the end of the 1990s, casting the spaces underneath a classroom full of chairs, for example. 

!Cathy Wilkes.

Scottish artist born in the 1960s who uses found objects which she juxtaposes to make allusive sculptural works. One work uses a camp beds and a man’s tie, another a small ornament on a shelf. There is an solitary and pensive quality to Wilkes’ work. 

!Stephen Willats.

British artist born in the 1950s who makes installation, text based and graphic work. Willats has also self published a number of books and pamphlets. Willats investigates how people live from a social, political and geographical perspective, employing survey questionnaires, plans and charts, statistics and photography. He has produced a magazine for a number years. An exhibition of his work would typically feature photographs and newspaper clippings with accompanying text and detailed captions, posters printed by him, often with painted or drawn additions, video and a publication. 

!Erland Williamson.

Born in 1965 Scottish artist Williamson made socially engaged work, before he died in 1995. Williamson customised a van that he used to take the road show that he created to many different places. The van contained a collapsible kiosk which the artist would set up and open as a kind of drop in centre. He might set it up on a housing estate and ask residents if they wished to fill in questionnaires about where they lived, have a cup of tea, make flyers and posters themselves. He acted as a grass roots activist with the intention of encouraging people to mobilise for change through his work. His work, the van and the kiosk has a strongly homemade aesthetic, hand painted signage on the van and kiosk done in an amateur style in gloss paint on hardboard, hand printed posters and flyers, a heavy dependence on the photocopier, and even t shirts for sale printed with his own slogans. 

!Jane and Louise Wilson.

British artist sisters born in the late 1960s who make large scale projected video installations. An early work from the beginning of the 1990s involved them filming themselves under hypnosis to see if they were telepathic because they are twins. At this time they also made a series of photographs showing parts of their bodies in empty offices, which were printed in a square format and hung at odd levels in the gallery relating to the architecture of the space. These photographs were an investigation into the nature of deserted space and the human traces left in them by default. The Wilson’s then began to make the work for which they are known. This usually involves the selection of a location, invariably an empty building with a specific purpose or history. Examples are Greenham Common nuclear base, a law court, and a casino. They film these empty spaces and add a soundtrack. Sometimes the film features the artists themselves, more recently there are no people in the work. The films are multi screen projections, often shown on adjacent walls so that they meet in a corner. The consequent interaction of the moving images is controlled and deliberate, creating a multiple view of the same space and refusing the viewer a fixed viewpoint. In some works the screens are placed at angles, freestanding, with projections on front and back. The Wilsons make free use of mirroring and doubling in their work, often seen as an obvious consequence of the fact that they are twins. They make run the same film both backwards and forwards so the that the images create a symmetrical pattern. The way the films are edited often leads to an abstract patterning effect. 

!Richard Wilson.

British artist who is best known for a work that was permanently installed in the Saatchi gallery in London. This consists of a steel tank which is waist height. The tank fills the room but there is a narrow projection into the tank allowing viewers to walk into the middle. The tank is apparently filled with black oil. The oil is no more than ten cm deep. Its opacity, viscosity, slight movement and reflectiveness create a feeling of vulnerability and disorientation in the viewer, paradoxically coupled with an atmosphere of contemplation. 

!TJ Wilson.

American artist who makes video using found footage, his own footage and often uses subtitles. He has made a film about a roman villa and another about a baby elephant and its mother, the subtitles for these are not intrinsic to the images ! Richard Wood. British artist born in the 1960s who made a series of sculptures by arranging coloured plastic storage baskets, trays and other items and melting them with a blow torch. They meld together, colours mingling and are transformed into spiked and dripped structures. Woods also made a cast of a rolled carpet rug and painted it to resemble the real carpet. 

!Wood and Harrison.

British artist duo born in the 1960s who make performance videos in which they use their own bodies to create physical sculptures. The artist rely on the weight and motion of their bodies and use each other as counterbalances in a series of interactions with simple props such as planks, boxes and sheets of ply. They create ramps, fulcrums, towers and execute sharply performed and choreographed manoeuvres that exhaustively explore interaction of human body with flat plane and with three dimensional object. The videos are shown on monitors, often each monitor shows a single work looped. The ambient sound of Wood and Harrison’s activities is often loud as sheets of timber are walked on, dropped for example. Wood and Harrison aim to apply the principles of minimal sculpture to live art, reminiscent of Robert Morris’s activity in Olympia with Carolee Schneeman and the early video work of Richard Serra and Vito Acconci. 

!Richard Woods.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes wall paintings. These consist of abstract patterned elements positioned in unconventional places, perhaps high up, across a corner, along the floor, or in some place that relates to the architecture of the building. The works sometimes cover a wall, but are more usually quite small, around one metre high or wide. The designs have many references: historical architectural decoration, tattoos, textile designs, architectural drawing and typography. Woods refines them until the references all but disappear into his sharp edged, precise, often monotone works. The works are hand painted in black, or one or two of the primary colours. 

!Christopher Wool.

American artist who makes large abstract paintings on a heavy gauge woven paper which are mainly printed, often using fragments of found patterns, with areas of paint added, predominantly in black and white. 

!Elizabeth Wright.

British artist born in the 1960s who makes sculpture and installation that is concerned with the relative size of objects. In the mid 1990s Wright made an installation which consisted of a floor strewn with over sized cigarette butts about 40 cm long, and Marlboro packets about 30 cm long. Both objects larger that life size but the wrong size in relation to each other. The objects are made from cardboard and paper which is painted to look realistic. Wright also made scaled down telephone directories which are actually printed and bound, supermarket carrier bags and crisp packets also printed, as well as a bicycle one third larger than life size. 

!Cerith Wyn Evans.

Welsh artist born in the 1950s who uses a variety of media. Wyn Evans’ work often includes or is based on literary or philosophical text. Many of his works are subtle alterations of a pre existing object in order to transform the everyday into the sublime. For example his neon exit sign in which the word is written backwards, his metal crowd barrier which is covered in gold leaf. Some works of Wyn Evans works are very simple in execution, for example a large circular convex mirror and a transparent chandelier. A luminous painting to read by is a 50 cm high canvas coated with luminous paint, to be hung at eh head of a bed, which is charged with enough light during the day to provide reading light at night. Sometimes his work takes the form of an unobtrusive site specific intervention, for example altering the pitch of some bells strung across a stairway to bar public access in the John Soane museum in London. Much of Wyn Evans’ early work is 16 mm film. His film about the death of the director Pasolini shows a group of small boys playing on a beach, as behind them a text, a quotation from Pasolini, outlined in fireworks on a specially constructed frame ignites, blazes and burns away. He ahs also use neon text running round a light fitting, a phrase that reads continuously with no end. Wyn Evans has made a number of neon works using text that reads in a loop, or can be read forwards and backwards, as well as small neon arabesque shapes. He has also made text etched onto Perspex panels that hang from the ceiling. This use of quotation is given its most complex rendering in a work from 2001. Wyn Evans hung a mirror ball in a gallery and projected a bright light at it. The light flashes on and off in a Morse code pattern, spelling out a quotation from Oscar Wilde. In 2003 Wyn Evans made a work consisting of several crystal chandeliers the bulbs of each flashing the Morse code for a particular extract from a philosophical or literary text. 

!Huang Yong Ping.

Chinese artist working from the 1980s onwards who made a sculpture by putting books in a washing machine and moulding the resulting pulp into a sphere. He also created a number of outdoor pyrotechnic events. 

!Andrea Zittel.

American artist born in the 1960s who makes functional sculptures. Zittel's series of portable living units includes a kitchen, a bedroom and a lounging area. The units are made so that they can be folded away and easily transported. They are made to a high specification with polished wood exteriors and upholstered interior with special fittings (lights, drop down tables, cupboards, handles and mirrors). The lounging area is a purple upholstered sunken seating area, the walls of the case functioning as the walls that enclose it. The kitchen is fully functional if minimal. Zittel has also designed a number of items of clothing and has made a site specific work in the desert near to where she lives. 